------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

5

¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“Command the children of Israel that they shall have every leper and
everyone who has an emission and everyone who is impure by a person go
from the camp.

[image]

---

Footnote 5:2. impure by a person. Meaning: something that has become impure
because of contact with the dead body of a person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ Male or female, you shall have them go; you shall have them go outside
the camp so they will not make their camps, among which I tent, impure.”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And the children of Israel did so, and they had them go outside the
camp. As YHWH spoke to Moses, so the children of Israel did.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶“Speak to the children of Israel: A man or a woman—when they will do
any of the sins of humans, to make a breach against YHWH—so that person
has guilt,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ then they shall confess their sin that they have done. And he shall pay
back for his guilt with its principal, and he shall add to it a fifth of
it, and he shall give it to the one whom he wronged.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And if the man does not have a redeemer, to pay him back for the guilt,
the guilt that is paid back is YHWH’s, for the priest, apart from the
ram of atonement by which he will make atonement for him.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And every donation of all the holy things of the children of Israel
that they will bring forward to the priest shall be his.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And each man’s holy things shall be his; what each man gives to the
priest shall be his.”

[image]

---

Footnote 5:10. shall be his. Meaning: shall be the priest’s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹²“Speak to the children of Israel, and you shall say to them: Any man
whose wife will go astray and will make a breach of faith with him,

[image]

---

Footnote 5:12. go astray. Hebrew root [image] This situation is known therefore
as the case of the [image]

Footnote 5:12. go astray. This section deals with the case of the suspected
[image]: a woman whose husband suspects her of adultery, but who has not
been proved guilty by evidence or witnesses. It would not merit special
notice as anything more than any other law, especially since it has not
been practiced for at least two millennia (and, I would say, probably
more than two-and-a-half millennia), but it has acquired special
importance because, first, it is regarded as the only case of trial by
ordeal in the Torah and, second, because questions about the legal
status of women have risen to prominence in this generation.

The woman is made to drink a mixture of holy water, dust from the
Tabernacle’s floor, and ink from a document expressing a curse if she is
guilty. Then, if “her womb swells and her thigh sags” she is understood
to be guilty. There have been many attempts to understand what is going
on in this strange case. The traditional Talmudic belief is that a
miracle is expected to occur through this procedure. Another view is
that the procedure is designed to scare guilty women into confessing
rather than face the ceremony and the curse. Another is that, since
drinking water with dust and ink does not produce these symptoms, this
is a law that is designed to find all women not guilty—and thus protect
suspected women from their husbands’ or town’s vengeance. Another view
is that this procedure can result in the condition of a prolapsed
uterus.

All the views leave questions: Why not have some procedure like this for
a man who is suspected of adultery? In fact, why not have a procedure
like this for any other crime, by a man or a woman? Also, even if the
woman is shown guilty, she is not executed, which elsewhere is the
penalty for adultery (Lev 20:10; Deut 22:22). So, to begin with: this
procedure must relate specifically to something (1) about women and not
men, and (2) about sex and adultery. I believe that all of the past
explanations are mistaken, and I offer the following explanation of this
case:

If we were told that a woman’s “womb is swelling and her thigh is
sagging,” nearly 100 percent of us would understand this to mean: she is
pregnant. So, in this case, it is explicitly about a woman who has had
sex with another man in place of her husband. That is, she has not slept
with her husband recently, and that is why her pregnancy is proof of
adultery. The purpose of drinking the mixture is not to prove her guilt
but to bring about the curse through her pregnancy. (Thus it is called
“the bitter cursing water”; and the priest says, “Let YHWH make you a
curse and an oath among your people when YHWH sets your thigh sagging
and your womb swelling.”) This is why the law applies only to women and
only to the matter of adultery: it is the only offense in the Torah in
which guilt can be determined by this biological fact, even when there
are no witnesses and no other evidence. And this is why the woman cannot
be executed: She has not been proved guilty in front of judges in a
court of law through witnesses. She has been shown to have done this in
front of priests at the Tabernacle. Therefore, she “shall bear her
crime” (see the comment on 5:31).

This has a more general implication as well. The reason that we have had
such difficulty understanding this case for millennia is that law is
constructed on analogy: we decide cases by precedents, by consistent
principles that apply to cases in a variety of circumstances. But
pregnancy is a condition that is without analogy in human experience.
That is why this case reads like no other. And that is why there are
agonizing, passionate debates in the present age over whether to save
the mother or the baby in a medical crisis during labor, over rights to
sperm and eggs that have been preserved, over surrogate mothers, and,
above all, over abortion: with arguments about when the developing being
inside the womb is a living human in its own right, and about the legal
rights of the mother over her own body in balance with the legal
protection of the fetus. There simply is no other experience in which
two lives are so utterly interconnected.

Why are the rabbis of the Talmudic era so unclear about the actual
procedure if it had been practiced in recent memory? Because, I think,
it had not been practiced since the time of the First Temple in
Jerusalem. It required dust from the Tabernacle floor, and the
Tabernacle was only in the First Temple, not in the Second. (A report in
the Mishnah that Rabbi Yohanan ben Zakkai abolished this procedure makes
no sense historically. By the time of his authority, even the Second
Temple was gone.) And so it came about that the actual meaning of this
ceremony was forgotten after many centuries of not being practiced, and
the result has been uncertainty and confusion about its meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ and a man has lain with her—an intercourse of seed—and it has been
hidden from her husband’s eyes, and she has kept concealed, and she has
been made impure, and there is no witness against her, and she has not
been caught,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ and a spirit of jealousy has come over him, and he is jealous about
his wife, and she has been made impure, or a spirit of jealousy has come
over him, and he is jealous about his wife, and she has not been made
impure:

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ then the man shall bring his wife to the priest and shall bring her
offering along with her: a tenth of an ephah of barley flour. He shall
not pour oil on it and shall not put frankincense on it, because it is
an offering about jealousies, an offering of bringing to mind: causing a
crime to be brought to mind.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶“And the priest shall bring her forward and stand her in front of
YHWH.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And the priest shall take holy water in a clay container, and the
priest shall take some of the dust that will be on the Tabernacle’s
floor and put it into the water.

[image]

---

Footnote 5:17. holy water. This is the only reference to holy water in the Torah.
It may be the water from the basin that the priests use for washing
(Exod 30:17–21); the basin is among the things that are identified as
“holy of holies” (30:28–29).

Footnote 5:17. dust. The woman must drink the water containing this dust (5:24).
Some have claimed that there is a parallel between this case and the
episode of the golden calf. Moses grinds the golden calf thin as dust
(Exod 32:20; Deut 9:21), scatters it in water, and makes the people
drink (Exodus 32). My reaction is that such a view is tenuous at best.
The people in Exodus are guilty! The [image] case is a process designed
to determine guilt. And the dust from the Tabernacle is something
positive, while the dust of the calf is the opposite. It is true that
the people of Israel’s turning to pagan gods is sometimes compared to
adultery in the Tanak: Israel is described as a faithless wife. And the
term that means “a breach of faith” (ma‘al) with a husband here refers
to breaches of faith with God in all its other occurrences in the Torah.
But the cases of the [image] and the golden calf have so many
fundamental differences that drawing a connection between them may
mislead more than shed light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And the priest shall stand the woman in front of YHWH and loosen the
hair of the woman’s head and put the offering of bringing to mind on her
hands; it is an offering of jealousies. And in the priest’s hand shall
be the bitter cursing water.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And the priest shall have her swear, and he shall say to the woman:
‘If a man has not lain with you, and if you have not gone astray in
impurity with someone in place of your husband, be cleared by this
bitter cursing water.

[image]

---

Footnote 5:19. in place of your husband. Suggesting that if she is pregnant it
must be by the other man, not the husband. Those who have other views of
the [image] procedure understand this phrase to mean “under your
husband,” and they interpret it as meaning “under his authority.” But
there is no reason why that had to be mentioned in the context of these
instructions. Moreover, the term here, Hebrew [image], means “in place
of” sixteen times in the Torah but never means “under someone’s
authority” (the term for that is “under the hand of,” Hebrew [image]
yad; cf. Gen 41:35).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ But you, if you have gone astray with someone in place of your husband
and if you have been made impure, and if a man other than your husband
has had his intercourse with you,’

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ then the priest shall have the woman swear a curse oath, and the
priest shall say to the woman, ‘let YHWH make you a curse and an oath
among your people when YHWH sets your thigh sagging and your womb
swelling,

[image]

---

Footnote 5:21. womb. Hebrew been. This word is commonly understood to mean
the woman’s “belly,” but in every one of its other ten occurrences in
the Torah it means “womb” (see, e.g. Gen 25:23). This is further
evidence that pregnancy is what this is all about.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² and this cursing water will come in your insides, to swell the womb
and make the thigh sag.’

“And the woman shall say, ‘Amen, amen.’

[image]

---

Footnote 5:22. to swell the womb and make the thigh sag. It is not clear whether
this refers to God’s making this happen (as is explicit in the preceding
verse) or to the water’s making it happen. It appears to me that God is
understood here to bring about the pregnancy—in the sense that all
pregnancies are understood to be enabled by God—and that the water
brings about the curse: “the bitter cursing water.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³“And the priest shall write these curses in a scroll and rub them into
the bitter water.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And he shall have the woman drink the bitter cursing water, and the
bitter cursing water will come into her.

[image]

---

Footnote 5:24. the bitter cursing water. Hebrew mê hammrîm
hamme’rrîm. The obvious alliteration is one of several
cases of wordplay in this text: Hebrew [image] (it has been hidden)
reverses the root letters of [image] (breach). Hebrew [image] (a tenth)
reverses the root letters of [image] (barley). Hebrew [image] (loosen
the hair) reverses [image] (dust). And Hebrew [image] (cursing) has
strong alliteration with [image] (bitter). This wordplay involves much
more than artistry with language. Each of these puns is linked to an
aspect of this ceremony that is unique in some way: This is the only
case in which [image] (to make a breach) is used for an offense against
a human rather than God (see the comment on Lev 5:15). It is the only
time that [image] (barley flour) is used for a grain offering. It is the
only use of [image] the It is the only time that (dust) from the
Tabernacle. And this strange use of water (holy water, with a curse
melted into it) is the most unusual of all. Puns are common in the
Torah’s stories, but their appearance in a law is extremely unusual and
unexpected. They highlight the unusual aspect of this case, and they
summon to mind associations with the realm of magic, in which the
artistry of language and poetry figure in incantations and ceremonies.
Likewise, the dissolving of the words of the curse into the water, the
dust from the Tabernacle, the water from the priests’ basin, the act of
drinking a mixture that produces a curse: much of this has parallels in
magic in other cultures, and all of this renders this ceremony
mysterious. And it fits with the fact that the function of this
procedure is not to establish legal guilt but rather to produce the
curse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And the priest shall take the offering of jealousies from the woman’s
hand and elevate the offering in front of YHWH, and he shall bring her
forward to the altar.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁶ And the priest shall take a fistful from the grain offering, a
representative portion of it, and burn it to smoke at the altar, and
after that he shall have the woman drink the water.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:27

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁷ When he has had her drink the water, then it will be, if she has been
made impure and has made a breach of faith with her husband, when the
bitter cursing water will come into her, and her womb will swell and her
thigh will sag, then the woman will become a curse among her people.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:28

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁸ And if the woman has not been made impure, and she is pure, then she
shall be cleared and shall conceive seed.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:29

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁹“This is the instruction for jealousies, when a woman will go astray
with someone in place of her husband and be made impure,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:30

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁰ or when a spirit of jealousy will come over a man and he will be
jealous about his wife. And the priest shall stand the woman in front of
YHWH and do all of this instruction to her.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 5:31

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³¹ And the man shall be clear of a crime, and that woman shall bear her
crime.”

[image]

---

Footnote 5:31. the man shall be clear of a crime. This is usually understood to
mean that the husband is innocent of the crime of making a false charge
against his wife. But this is a questionable reading since the text does
not say that he has made any charge against her; he has just brought her
to the priest to make the determination of whether his jealousy is
correct or not. This may rather refer to the other man, the one who had
intercourse with the woman. The procedure proves only that the woman has
had intercourse; it cannot prove who the man was. It is therefore not
possible to convict the man by this procedure.

This also answers the question of why this procedure applies only to
women. A man accused of adultery does not go through this. Because only
women can become pregnant, it is only women who can be proved to have
committed adultery in the absence of witnesses or any other evidence.
(This brings to mind the case of Bathsheba, who becomes pregnant through
adultery with David. Her pregnancy while her husband has been away at
war is what would make her adultery known; 2 Samuel 11.)
