------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6

¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“Speak to the children of Israel, and you shall say to them: When a man
or a woman will expressly make a Nazirite vow to make a separation for
YHWH,

[image]

---

Footnote 6:2. a man or a woman. Although the rest of the law is stated in the
masculine, the entire matter of choosing to be a Nazirite applies to
both men and women.

Footnote 6:2. make a separation for YHWH. A Nazirite vows to give up certain
things and live in a state of holiness. There is the general idea in the
Torah that all the people are holy (Lev 19:1), but the Nazirite vow
refers to a singular state that exceeds that. The Nazirite gives up
three things: consuming alcohol, coming near to dead persons, and
cutting his or her hair. Why these three things? These three things are
related to priesthood—and particularly to the high priest. Israel’s
priests are forbidden to consume alcohol at the Tent of Meeting, and
this is the first command in the Torah that God gives directly to Aaron,
the high priest, not to Moses (Lev 10:9). Priests are forbidden to come
to dead persons except their closest relatives (Lev 21:1–3), and the
high priest is commanded that “he shall not come to any dead persons; he
shall not become impure for his father and for his mother” (21:11)—which
is the wording here for the Nazirite as well: “he shall not come to a
dead person. For his father and for his mother, for his brother and for
his sister: he shall not become impure for them” (Num 6:6–7). But in the
matter of the hair, the high priest is commanded to do the opposite of
the Nazirite: The Nazirite shall “grow the hair of his head loose” (Num
6:5), but the high priest “shall not let loose the hair of his head”
(Lev 21:10). What does it mean that a Nazirite is someone who chooses to
live in certain respects like a high priest but that a high priest is
commanded not to have the most obvious characteristic of the Nazirite?

The issue appears to me to relate to the fact that the clergy in Israel
is not open to most Israelites to choose, but only to members of the
tribe of Levi by heredity, and then only to males; and the priesthood
comes to be limited only to a certain family within Levi, the family of
Aaron; and the high priesthood is limited to a son of the preceding high
priest. Prophets can be from any tribe and can be male or female; one
becomes a prophet by being called by God. Postbiblically, rabbis replace
priests as the primary clergy of the Jews, and membership in the
rabbinate is open to anyone who chooses it and proves capable of
qualifying and carrying it out. Originally it was limited to males, but
in the present generation the Reform, Conservative, and
Reconstructionist movements have included both females and males. So
what option does a person in the biblical world have who is drawn to the
holy life of a priest but who is not a male Levite from the family of
Aaron? Such a person can choose to be a Nazirite. And note the case of
Samuel: he becomes a priest, seemingly the high priest, even though he
is not a Levite—and Samuel is a Nazirite! He replaces the Levite high
priest Eli at the Tabernacle at Shiloh, and he performs sacrifices,
which no nonpriest, even the king, may do (1 Samuel 1–13). Historically,
the law forbidding the high priest to let his hair grow loose may have
been composed precisely to establish that this could never happen again.
No one outside the Aaronid Levite clan could just choose to enter the
clergy and rise in the priesthood. As the law stands in the Torah now,
preceding the story of Samuel, it means that the case of Samuel must be
regarded as unique, with Samuel’s rise in the priesthood being the
result of a special selection by God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ he shall separate from wine and beer; he shall not drink any vinegar of
wine or vinegar of beer, and he shall not drink any juice of grapes, and
he shall not eat fresh or dried grapes.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ All the days of his being a Nazirite, he shall not eat anything that is
made from the grapevine, from seeds to skin.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ All the days of his Nazirite vow, a razor shall not pass on his head;
until the fulfillment of the days that he will make a separation for
YHWH, he shall be holy, growing the hair of his head loose.

[image]

---

Footnote 6:5. he shall be holy. This, too, is like priests (“They shall be holy
to their God,” Lev 21:6). And since it especially mentions the name of
God (“a separation for YHWH”), it is especially like the high priest
(“I, YHWH, make him holy,” Lev 21:15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ All the days of his making a separation for YHWH he shall not come to a
dead person.

[image]

---

Footnote 6:6. come to a dead person. Meaning: touch a dead body. Interestingly,
the case of Samson is different. Like Samuel, he is a Nazirite from
birth, and he is forbidden to cut his hair—which becomes the key to his
story. But he is not forbidden to have contact with dead bodies—which is
also essential to the story, because he becomes a warrior and personally
makes thousands of dead bodies!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ For his father and for his mother, for his brother and for his sister:
he shall not become impure for them when they die, because the crown of
his God is on his head.

[image]

---

Footnote 6:7. the crown of his God is on his head. As I noted in the case of the
high priest, the Hebrew term n[image]zer has the same range as the
English word crown, denoting either the top of the head or the headdress
worn by a king or priest (see my comment on Lev 21:12). Here it refers
to the hair on the Nazirite’s head, which may not be cut. As long as the
man or woman wears the uncut Nazirite hair, he or she also follows the
high priest’s practice of not touching a corpse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ All the days of his being a Nazirite he is holy to YHWH.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And if someone will die by chance suddenly by him and will make his
head’s crown impure, then he shall shave his head on the day of his
purification: he shall shave it on the seventh day.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtledoves or two pigeons to
the priest, to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And the priest shall do one as a sin offering and one as a burnt
offering and shall make atonement over him in that he has sinned over a
person. And he shall make his head holy on that day.

[image]

---

Footnote 6:11. a person. Meaning: a dead person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And he shall make a separation for YHWH for the days of his being a
Nazirite, and he shall bring a lamb in its first year for a guilt
offering, and the first days shall fall because his Nazirite state
became impure.

[image]

---

Footnote 6:12. the first days shall fall. The time that he spent as a Nazirite
before becoming impure by contact with a corpse does not count toward
the time that he vowed to spend as a Nazirite. It is nullified by the
contact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³“And this is the instruction for the Nazirite: On the day of the
fulfillment of the days of his being a Nazirite one shall bring him to
the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And he shall make his offering to YHWH: one unblemished lamb in its
first year for a burnt offering and one unblemished ewe-lamb in its
first year for a sin offering and one unblemished ram for a peace
offering

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ and a basket of unleavened bread of fine flour, cakes mixed with oil
and unleavened wafers with oil poured on them with their grain offering
and their libations.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And the priest shall bring it forward in front of YHWH and shall do
his sin offering and his burnt offering.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And he shall make the ram a peace-offering sacrifice to YHWH with the
basket of unleavened bread, and the priest shall do his grain offering
and his libation.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And the Nazirite shall shave his head’s crown at the entrance of the
Tent of Meeting and shall take the hair of his head’s crown and put it
on the fire that is under the peace-offering sacrifice.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And the priest shall take the cooked shoulder from the ram and one
unleavened cake from the basket and one unleavened wafer and put them on
the Nazirite’s hands after his crown is shaved.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And the priest shall elevate them, an elevation offering in front of
YHWH. It is holy for the priest along with the breast of the elevation
offering and the thigh of the donation. And after that the Nazirite may
drink wine.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ This is the instruction for the Nazirite who will vow his offering to
YHWH for his being a Nazirite outside of what his hand may attain.
According to his vow that he will make, so he shall do along with the
instruction of his being a Nazirite.”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³“Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is how you shall bless
the children of Israel; say to them:

[image]

---

Footnote 6:23. This is how you shall bless. A new form of expression that enters
biblical narrative in the book of Numbers is prayer. In earlier books
there have been depictions of individuals in prayer, but Numbers
includes a formal prayer, commanded to be said verbatim by the priests,
known as the priestly benediction (6:22–27). This blessing has been
pronounced upon the congregation by those of priestly descent presumably
from the biblical period until the present day (in some synagogues). It
has come to be of special interest recently. While staying in Jerusalem
in the summer of 1978, I looked out my window and watched a team of
archaeologists working below. They had uncovered Jewish tombs of the
Iron Age. I (and they) did not know it then, but inscriptions in thin
silver foil that they discovered were later painstakingly unrolled and
found to bear the words of the priestly benediction. The silver foil
inscriptions are the oldest known texts of a passage from the Bible.
(Their wording differs slightly from the biblical text and from each
other.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ May YHWH bless you and watch over you.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

---

Footnote 6:24. you. The language of the priestly benediction, like the Decalogue,
is formulated in the second-person singular. Although the priests are
instructed to bless the entire people with it, and although it
historically has been pronounced as a congregational blessing, it is
both a personal and a communal wish. In three brief lines the priests
wish each individual Israelite divine blessing, protection, favor,
grace, attention, and peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ May YHWH make His face shine to you and be gracious to you.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁶ May YHWH raise His face to you and give you peace.

[image]

---

Footnote 6:26. and give you peace. The culminating wish of peace in the priestly
benediction is particularly poignant because Numbers is the first book
of the Bible so far to concentrate on war. Certainly peace can mean a
secure condition for an individual generally rather than being limited
to meaning an absence of war, but the issue of war is so much a part of
Numbers that the reference to peace in this significant position is
nonetheless quite striking. It appears in the beginning section of the
book as part of the preparation at Mount Sinai for the journey to come.
The people’s journey then comes to include substantial doses of reality
in the form of confrontations with hostile groups. Israel’s only
experience of war before this is in the brief account of an attack by
the Amalekites shortly after the exodus as the people first approach
Horeb (Exod 17:8–16). Indeed, the book of Exodus reports that the reason
the Israelites go to the Red Sea on the way out of Egypt instead of
taking the more obvious route, overland through Philistine territory, is
that YHWH is concerned that they are not yet ready to face war (13:17).
When the Egyptian army pursues them, Moses instructs them, “YHWH will
fight for you, and you’ll keep quiet!” (14:14); and again in the Song of
the Sea, it is the deity who is described as a warrior (15:3). Genesis
recounts only one battle, in which Abraham becomes involved because of
the capture of his nephew Lot (Genesis 14). Leviticus includes no
battles, and the word “war” does not occur in it. Deuteronomy, as I
shall discuss, treats the subject of war through remarkable legislation
but not through narrative other than to refer to the war episodes of
Numbers. It is Numbers alone among the Five Books of Moses that
especially develops this worst of human conditions through narrative of
specific military encounters. And it is Numbers that says, “May YHWH
give you peace”!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 6:27

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁷ And they shall set my name on the children of Israel, and I shall
bless them.”

[image]
