------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

12

¹ And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses about the Cushite wife whom he
had taken—because he had taken a Cushite wife.

[image]

---

Footnote 12:1. the Cushite wife. Cush is usually understood to be Ethiopia. Its
people are identified as descendants of Noah’s son Ham (Gen 10:6–7). On
this understanding, Moses has taken an Ethiopian wife in addition to his
first, Midianite wife, Zipporah. This has been confused somewhat by the
fact that the prophet Habakkuk refers to a place called Cushan in
parallel with Midian (Hab 3:7). Some scholars, therefore, have concluded
that the Cushite wife is Zipporah herself (so Ibn Ezra). But this latter
view does not explain why the text should suddenly refer to her here as
a Cushite. Also, the words “because he had taken a Cushite wife”
certainly appear to be here in the verse in order to inform us of an
essential new fact, but we already knew that he was married to Zipporah
(so Rashbam). This story, therefore, is about a second, probably
Ethiopian wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And they said, “Has YHWH only just spoken through Moses? Hasn’t He also
spoken through us?”

And YHWH heard.

[image]

---

Footnote 12:2. only just spoken. Aaron and Miriam say, “Has YHWH only just spoken
through Moses?” “Only just” sounds redundant. The redundant word “only,”
though, is Hebrew raq, and the story concludes with YHWH demanding a
measure of punishment of Miriam comparable to the shame she would have
experienced if her father “had spit in her face,” which is Hebrew
y[image]r[image]q y[image]raq (12:14), an intensive form that doubles
the verb—and doubly emphasizes the pun. And the pun confirms that
Miriam’s punishment is meant to fit the crime: see the comment on v. 10.

One might regard this last pun as a relatively minor item of wordplay,
but it is in fact part of an elaborate chain of puns that are stitched
through this section of Numbers. The chain encompasses this story and
the one that precedes it, the story of Moses’ anguished complaint and
the appointment of the seventy elders to share his load. The first word
of that story is the extremely unusual and uncertain term ’sapsup
(spelled with an unvocalized aleph at the beginning because it is
preceded by the definite article), meaning a “gathered mass”
(classically translated as a “mixed multitude”) among the Israelites.
The root letters of this strange word (’SP) then resurface in a showcase
of forms through this story and the next one:

[image]

Through fourteen variations on the root letters, we are brought from the
crisis that is generated by the “gathered mass” to resolution when
Miriam is “gathered back” (h[image]’[image]s[image]p). Moreover, this
chain of paronomasia may serve to stitch these two stories more tightly
together and thus suggest a relationship between the seventy elders’
prophesying in Numbers 11 and Aaron’s and Miriam’s complaint in Numbers
12 (“Has YHWH only just spoken through Moses?”).

Footnote 12:2. they said, “Has YHWH only just spoken through Moses?” What does
this complaint have to do with Moses’ wife?! Answer: nothing. Like
someone who has had a bad day and comes home and complains about dinner,
Aaron and Miriam do not voice what is really bothering them. They
redirect their annoyance at Moses himself. Aaron and Miriam have been
identified as prophets (Exod 7:1; 15:20). God has spoken to Aaron, and
Aaron was part of the group that had a vision of God on Sinai (Exodus
24). And so they question Moses’ position: is he the only one close to
God? It is common for people to redirect anger, but it has risks in
every case, especially when it occurs within a family. This episode
dramatizes that danger: Miriam and Aaron bring God into what was a
family dispute. This is a mistake! God appears, and they suffer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And the man Moses was very humble, more than every human who was on the
face of the earth.

[image]

[image]

---

Footnote 12:3. humble, more than every human who was on the face of the earth. Is
this the humblest man on earth? But he is the man who has just said
things to God like “Why have you done bad to your servant?” and “If this
is how you treat me, kill me!” We might say that his closeness to God
enables him to speak this way to the deity while still being humble when
dealing with other human beings. But then how are we to account for the
way he spoke to the Pharaoh before the last plague in Egypt: “All these
servants of yours will come down to me, and they’ll bow to me” (Exod
11:8)? Perhaps it is precisely his experiences in Egypt and at Sinai
that have made him now the humblest of humans. Having seen the extent of
God’s power, he feels humble. Having seen his inability to handle the
people and their complaints on his own, he feels humbler still. Thus,
even when he speaks to God with his audacious closeness, he says, “I’m
not able, I, by myself, to carry this entire people, because it’s too
heavy for me” (11:14).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And YHWH said suddenly to Moses and to Aaron and to Miriam, “Go out,
the three of you, to the Tent of Meeting.” And the three of them went
out.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And YHWH came down in a column of cloud and stood at the entrance of
the tent. And He called, “Aaron and Miriam.” And the two of them went
out.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And He said, “Hear my words:

If there will be a prophet among you,

I, YHWH, shall be known to him in a vision;

in a dream I shall speak through him.

[image]

---

Footnote 12:6. in a vision; in a dream. All prophetic experience in the Tanak is
understood to be through visions and dreams—except Moses’. The fifteen
books of the Hebrew Bible that are named for prophets either identify
the prophets’ experiences as visions or else leave the form of the
experiences undescribed (Ezek 12:27; 40:2; Hos 12:11; Hab 2:2; Mic 3:6).
Many begin by identifying the book’s contents as the prophet’s vision:
“The vision of Isaiah” (Isa 1:1; cf. 2 Chr 32:32); “The vision of
Obadiah” (Oba 1); “The book of the vision of Nahum” (Nah 1:1); “The
words of Amos … which he envisioned” (Amos 1:1); “The word of YHWH that
came to Micah … which he envisioned” (Mic 1:1); “The oracle that
Habakkuk the prophet envisioned” (Hab 1:1).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ Not so is my servant Moses;

in all my house he is faithful.

[image]

---

Footnote 12:7. Not so is my servant Moses. Some experiences are impressive or
inspiring or powerful in themselves; and some experiences change a
person’s life ever after. The moment at which Moses sees the form of God
from the back on Sinai separates him from all other prophets (Exod
33:21–23). It is understood that no other prophet has a standing that is
equal to that of Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ Mouth to mouth I shall speak through him

and vision and not in enigmas,

and he will see the form of YHWH.

And why did you not fear to speak against my servant,

against Moses?”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And YHWH’s anger flared against them, and He went.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And the cloud turned from over the tent; and, here, Miriam was
leprous, like snow. And Aaron turned to Miriam, and, here, she was
leprous.

[image]

---

Footnote 12:10. leprous, like snow. Miriam is left with a kind of leprosy in
which her flesh is devoid of pigment. If we understand correctly that
the Cushite wife is Ethiopian, then this is a provocative case of
punishment to suit the crime and a powerful biblical statement regarding
racism. It is as if God says to Miriam: “You don’t like a woman with
dark pigmentation? Then you don’t have to have any pigmentation!” Or:
“You don’t like a woman who is black? Try being completely white!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And Aaron said to Moses, “In me, my lord. Don’t set a sin on us, which
we did foolishly and which we sinned.

[image]

---

Footnote 12:11. my lord. Aaron addressed Moses as “my lord” one other time: in
the golden calf episode. On each of the two occasions on which he has
acted inappropriately toward Moses, he has ended up having to
acknowledge Moses’ status humbly and politely.

Footnote 12:11. Don’t set a sin on us. Aaron acknowledges that both he and Miriam
are guilty. He says, “Don’t set a sin on us, which we did foolishly and
which we sinned.” Why is there no consequence here for Aaron? Why does
Miriam suffer while Aaron does not? As I commented in the case of
Aaron’s making the golden calf, the answer may be that Aaron is the high
priest. In that position he cannot suffer any direct punishment from
God, which would both disqualify him and demean the office of high
priest. And so what is left is for Aaron to make amends through personal
atonement. What is impressive here is that he frames his atonement
entirely in terms of Miriam. He acknowledges his own equal culpability,
and he pleads with Moses to intercede for his sister.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² Let her not be like the dead who, when he comes out of his mother’s
womb, half of his flesh is eaten up!”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And Moses cried out to YHWH, saying, “Oh, God, heal her!”

[image]

---

Footnote 12:13. Oh, God, heal her! The untranslatable Hebrew n[image]’ particle
occurs twice in Moses’ words, conveying that this is a fervent plea,
something like: “God, please, heal her, please!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And YHWH said to Moses, “And if her father had spit in her face,
wouldn’t she be humiliated seven days? Let her be closed up seven days
outside the camp, and after that let her be gathered back.”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And Miriam was closed up outside the camp seven days. And the people
did not travel until Miriam was gathered back, and after that the people
traveled from Hazeroth. And they camped in the Paran wilderness.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 12:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[image]
