------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

36

¹ And the heads of the fathers of the family of the children of Gilead
son of Machir son of Manasseh, from the families of the children of
Joseph, came forward and spoke in front of Moses and in front of the
chieftains, heads of fathers of the children of Israel.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And they said, “YHWH commanded my lord to give the land as legacy by
lot to the children of Israel, and my lord was commanded by YHWH to give
the legacy of Zelophehad, our brother, to his daughters.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ If they will become wives to one of the sons of the tribes of the
children of Israel, then their legacy will be subtracted from our
fathers’ legacy and added onto the legacy of the tribe to whom they will
belong, and it will be subtracted from our legacy by the lot.

[image]

---

Footnote 36:3. their legacy will be subtracted. Whenever a new law arises that
makes a social change, there will be consequences that will make the
matter complex. Earlier (27:4), Zelophehad’s daughters protested that
since their father had no sons, his land would not be passed on. And so,
they said, “Why should our father’s name be subtracted?” It was
therefore determined that, in such a situation, women can inherit their
father’s land. But now their tribe (Manasseh) realizes that this leads
to a new problem. If these women marry men from other tribes, then their
land will pass by inheritance to the sons whom they will have. But
tribal identification goes by the father, not the mother.
(Identification in the Torah is always patrilineal; see the comment on
Lev 24:16,22.) And so their sons will be members of their fathers’
tribes, not members of Manasseh. And so some of the territory of
Manasseh would be subtracted from Manasseh and passed to another tribe.
(A contemporary analogy would be if parts of a state or country could be
transferred away to another state or country without the former having
any say in the matter.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And if the children of Israel will have the jubilee, then their legacy
will be added onto the legacy of the tribe to whom they will belong, and
their legacy will be subtracted from the legacy of our fathers’ tribe.”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And Moses commanded the children of Israel by YHWH’s word, saying, “The
children of Joseph speak right.

[image]

---

Footnote 36:5. The children of Joseph speak right. These are the exact words that
Moses had said about the case that Zelophehad’s daughters made:
“Zelophehad’s daughters speak right” (Num 27:7). This case thus involves
a conflict between two legitimate positions. And so we must rely on
human judgment on questions of new consequences of laws. This requires
turning to those who have both learning and wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ This is the thing that YHWH has commanded Zelophehad’s daughters,
saying: They shall become wives for any in whose eyes it is good,
except: they shall become wives to the family of their father’s tribe.

[image]

---

Footnote 36:6. they shall become wives to the family of their father’s tribe. The
decision on the conflicting claims of Zelophehad’s daughters and the
leaders of their tribe (Manasseh) results in a limitation on the rights
of women that were established in the original case. If there are no
sons, daughters may still inherit their father’s property, but they must
then marry only men from their own tribe. If they choose to marry
outside their tribe, they lose their legacy, and it passes to their
father’s brothers instead.

Beside the immediate issues of this case, it teaches a broader principle
of law as well. When any law is instituted, there may be situations and
consequences later that require a modification of the law. There must be
a mechanism for dealing with such situations. In the wilderness Moses
can turn directly to God for an answer. But later that is no longer
possible. And so we must rely on human judgment on questions of new
consequences of laws. This requires turning to those who have both
learning and wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ So a legacy of the children of Israel will not turn from tribe to
tribe, but the children of Israel shall each cling to the legacy of his
fathers’ tribe.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And any daughter who inherits a legacy from the tribes of the children
of Israel shall become a wife to someone from a family of her father’s
tribe, so that the children of Israel will each inherit his fathers’
legacy,

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ and a legacy will not turn from a tribe to another tribe, but the
tribes of the children of Israel shall each cling to its legacy.”

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ As YHWH commanded Moses, so Zelophehad’s daughters did.

[image]

---

Footnote 36:10. Zelophehad’s daughters. Numbers concludes with this account of a
ruling on a point of law that has arisen out of an earlier ruling on
women’s property rights in the case of the daughters of Zelophehad. It
is a strange ending, not only because it is anticlimactic but because it
is not remotely a denouement to all that has been narrated so far in the
book. The slave mentality of the people, their rebellions, their
rejection of the land, the development of Moses’ character and of his
relationship with God, the challenges to his authority, the great
miraculous events and the continuous divine nurturing, the entire theme
of the journey from Sinai to the promised land itself—all of these
things seem to be left without a finish at the end of Numbers. This,
however, is consistent with what we have already observed: that Numbers
is less self-contained than the other books of the Five Books of Moses.
The natural culmination and conclusion to all these things is the death
of Moses, which is pictured as resulting from the spiral of all these
elements. But Moses’ death is to be preceded by an exceptionally long
address by the prophet, which would have been too long to include in
Numbers. It would have doubled the length of the book. And so the
division of the originally continuous biblical text into five books has
left Numbers with a finish that is unsatisfactory in itself but that
serves to point us to a coming climax and resolution in the book of
Deuteronomy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah and Milcah and Noah, Zelophehad’s
daughters, became wives to their uncles’ sons.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² They became wives within the families of the children of Manasseh son
of Joseph, and their legacy was on the tribe of their father’s family.

[image]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Numbers 36:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ These are the commandments and the judgments that YHWH commanded by
Moses’ hand to the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by the
Jordan toward Jericho.

[image]

---

Footnote 36:13. by Moses’ hand. Numbers develops what was begun in Exodus in the
matter of the man Moses himself. Exodus began to present the complex and
conflicting sides of his personality. Now in Numbers we see these
elements of Moses’ character operating and metamorphosing through a
variety of circumstances. There are fewer glimpses of him alone in
conversation with God and more portrayals of his deepening connection
with the people to whom he has been bound not by choice but by divine
decision. Through the course of Numbers he emerges as the most textured
personality in the Hebrew Bible, the closest to God and yet perhaps the
most empathetically human. His humility is depicted in conflict with his
anger; his love of his fellow humans is set in tension with his repeated
disappointments over their rebelliousness and lack of wisdom. Precisely
in his closeness to God he speaks to the deity in language that appears
audacious by usual human conceptions of reverence before the divine,
even more audacious than his own words at Sinai in Exodus (32:32;
33:12–16). And, despite his protests to the people that it is not
against him but God that they are complaining, after years of closeness
to the divine—human boundary of authority he comes to infringe on that
boundary and thus brings upon himself the condemnation of death. Whether
or not one regards this depiction as tragic in the Greek sense, one must
appreciate its power and its irony. One can also appreciate that it
exemplifies the issue of the danger of coming close to the divine, which
is present through the course of the book of Numbers. The cosmic and the
historical are bound in a particularly pervasive way in Numbers: in the
record of the people, who witness and are sustained by constant miracles
and whose closeness to the cosmic occasionally brings them into contact
with fearful phenomena; in the life of the priesthood, where closeness
to the cosmic realm is an ongoing and threatening concern; and in the
life of Moses himself, where his extraordinary position on that boundary
is at the heart of the episodes about him in this book.

A closing comment on the book of Numbers

Scholars have often described the book of Numbers as a hodgepodge of
relatively unconnected narratives, laws, and poems. They say it is
heterogeneous and the least unified composition in the Torah. But, on
the contrary, the book is coherent and tightly woven. The journey is the
unifying element. It functions both through time (by its chronology of
events) and space (by the geographical placement of the events along the
route of travel) to organize the episodes into a related story. Elements
of language and recurring themes contribute to this unity. Most of all,
though, the events of the journey themselves bind the story, for they
are not a collection of unrelated episodes. A connecting line of cause
and effect runs through them so that they can be read both as individual
stories and as a meaningful chain of events. Indeed, the episodes of the
journey described in the book of Numbers are much more clearly related
to one another than those of the epic of Gilgamesh or The Odyssey.

Here is a review of the book with attention to the narrative’s
progression:

The story of the journey begins with an account of preparations for the
departure. There is a census, the Levites are numbered and assigned to
care for the Tabernacle, YHWH gives a group of laws relating to
maintaining purity in the camp, a number of ritual matters are described
(the priestly blessing, the menorah, the Passover sacrifice), the tribal
offerings for the Tabernacle are enumerated, and instructions for travel
are given: travel is to follow the movements of the cloud and fire over
the Tabernacle and is to be signaled by blasts on two silver trumpets.

This takes up the great majority of the first ten chapters of the book.
Then the moment of departure arrives. The journey begins with the people
complaining (11:1–3). The reason for their grumbling is not told. The
story’s function, therefore, is rather to establish the people’s state
of mind as they set out. With the usual biblical economy of wording, the
text, which is only three verses long, conveys the dynamic of the
triangle of God, the people, and Moses. The people anger YHWH, He
plagues them (in this case with fire), they cry to Moses, Moses pleads
on their behalf, and the plague stops. Most notably about this dynamic:
the people still address Moses rather than God. They still focus on the
human leader.

This role for Moses has direct implications for the episode that
immediately follows (11:4–34). The people’s complaint in this case is
over food. They find the manna that they have been eating to be
unsatisfactory compared to the food that they received—“free”!—in Egypt
(11:5). They cry for meat. Moses, apparently unable to bear the burden
of being the sole leader any longer, pours out his heart to YHWH in one
of the most remarkable speeches in the Scriptures. Having come closer to
God than any other human being has, Moses speaks to God as no other
human being in the Hebrew Bible does: “Why have you done bad to your
servant … if this is how you treat me, kill me” (11:11–15).

God’s response to this anguished yet audacious speech is seemingly to
ignore its emotional content and to go directly to the solution of the
problem. This mode of divine response is akin to earlier accounts we
have observed, in which the deity addresses what is in the person’s
heart rather than what the person says. YHWH instructs Moses to gather
seventy of the elders of Israel and to inform the people that they will
receive meat the next day. The meat comes in the form of birds that a
divine wind carries to the camp. The assistance to Moses comes as God
takes some of the spirit that is on Moses and sets it on the seventy
elders, who then prophesy. Despite the uncertainty about the terms, it
is understood that Moses’ special role as the people’s prophet is now
shared in some way with others.

This in turn sets the stage for the episode that follows, the story of
“snow-white” Miriam in Numbers 362. Miriam and Aaron speak against
Moses. On the heels of the story of the sharing of Moses’ prophetic
status, they ask, “Has YHWH only just spoken through Moses? Hasn’t He
also spoken through us?” Their concern is a personal matter, but they
involve God. This error of judgment draws God personally into the matter
and proves costly. Moses does not defend himself, but YHWH defends him
to Aaron and Miriam, declaring that Moses’ experience of the divine is
indeed qualitatively different from the prophetic experience of
others—Moses has actually seen God—and the deity concludes with the
ominous words, “And why did you not fear to speak against my servant,
against Moses?” (12:8). Miriam is left with the leprosy. Aaron, like the
people in the first episode, appeals to Moses, whose superiority he now
appears to acknowledge by addressing him as “my lord.” Moses in turn
intercedes with God, and Miriam is healed after a week passes. The story
thus establishes by word and action that Moses’ singular experience of
God at Sinai has left him with a singular relationship with God.

This unique status of Moses out of all the people of Israel then plays a
part at a crucial moment in the destiny of the people, depicted in the
next episode of the journey, the episode of the scouts (Numbers 363–14).
Once again the people complain against Moses (and Aaron) and speak of
appointing new leaders and returning to Egypt. On the verge of their
arrival and of the fulfillment of the promise to be free people in their
own land, they want to turn back to Egypt. YHWH’s response is the same
as in the matter of the golden calf. He tells Moses that he plans to
destroy the nation and start over with Moses’ descendants. In the wake
of the preceding episodes, which establish Moses’ exceptional status and
closeness to God, this divine plan—making Moses a sort of new Abraham—is
even more understandable, and therefore more frightening, than in the
golden calf episode; and Moses’ appeal to the deity to relent is about
50 percent longer. Again Moses raises the point of “what will the
Egyptians say?” but this time he adds references to what the inhabitants
of the land, and the other nations as well, will say, namely, “Because
YHWH wasn’t able to bring this people to the land that He swore to them,
He slaughtered them in the wilderness” (14:16). Moses’ second ground for
appeal this time is to quote YHWH’s own words back to Him, the words of
the divine formula that YHWH had said to Moses in the moment that Moses
had actually seen God: “as you spoke, saying, ‘YHWH is slow to anger and
abounding in kindness, bearing crime and offense. . . .’ ” Once again
Moses’ appeal is successful, but it is important to see that in this
instance the decree and the appeal have a greater depth in the narrative
than in the golden calf account. In particular, the Miriam episode,
which immediately precedes this, has underscored the uniqueness of
Moses’ relationship with God, and in identifying this relationship it
has referred to the very moment that now figures crucially in Moses’
appeal to save the people—the moment in which Moses saw God and was told
the qualities of the divine personality. The episodes of the journey in
Numbers are thus linked together both in a general thematic way and in
specific connecting elements.

Although Moses is successful in his appeal that the people not be wiped
out, the divine reprieve is only a partial one. The fact remains that
their slave mentality has surfaced again, and they have shown themselves
to be not only fearful and ungrateful but unprepared for the
responsibilities that go with being a free people in their own land.
YHWH decrees that none of these people of the generation who have seen
His power since they were in Egypt will live to arrive in the promised
land. They are condemned to extend their journey in the wilderness to
forty years, during which time everyone from the age of twenty and older
will die, with the exception of the two dissenting scouts Caleb and
Joshua. (We can deduce from subsequent events that Moses and Aaron, too,
do not fall under this decree.) The journey is thus transformed horribly
for the exodus generation from a short trip to a promised land into a
lengthy movement with no end until death. They are undeserving of
bondage and unequipped for freedom, but these are the two known
conditions of residence in a land in their world, and this dilemma
leaves them in an interim state on a journey without a destination.

In the following chapter, YHWH gives Moses a series of commands
concerning the nation’s sacrifices when they arrive in the land (15:2),
which seems like a confirmation that God does intend to bring the
younger generation there ultimately, and it is a painful indication to
the older generation of what they have lost. He also instructs the
people to wear fringes on their clothing forever, and, in a rare
explanation for a law, tells them that the purpose of the fringe is to
serve as a visible reminder to keep all the other commandments and thus
be holy to their God (15:39–40). The decree that the exodus generation
will not be brought to the land and this reminder that they are to be a
holy people are then entwined together to figure centrally in the next
episode of the journey, the story of the rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram. The rebellion story combines the two issues. Dathan and Abiram
protest that Moses has not brought them to the land flowing with milk
and honey that they were promised (16:14); and Korah and his group
accuse Moses and Aaron of putting themselves above the people when “all
of the congregation, all of them, are holy” (16:3). The unity in the
chain of episodes in the journey is particularly visible here, in the
substance of the narrative and in its specific language.

The unity is also thematic. Leadership and the prerogatives thereof are
again the issue. Dathan and Abiram direct their challenge, like earlier
challenges, to Moses personally, rather than to the deity, as being the
one who has brought them out of Egypt—which they outrageously describe
as “a land flowing with milk and honey” (16:13)—but who has not brought
them to the promised land. Moses promises proof “that YHWH sent me to do
all these things, because it’s not from my own heart” (16:28). And the
continuing issue of leadership of the priesthood is combined with this
general issue of leadership, for Korah is a Levite, Moses’ and Aaron’s
first cousin (Exod 6:18–21), and Moses takes Korah’s group’s complaint
as a claim on the priesthood (Num 16:10). Their challenge, too, takes
the form of a personal attack on Moses and Aaron, and Moses refocuses
this attack as well, informing the challengers that they are “gathering
against YHWH,” and he adds, “And Aaron, what is he that you complain
against him?” (16:11). The full story therefore appears to recount an
alliance among several dissident groups who, despite their having
witnessed considerable miraculous evidence that Moses’ (and Aaron’s)
authority is divinely supported, choose nonetheless to raise challenges
to their status. As in the preceding episodes, the attack on Moses is
handled by God, and an earthquake and miraculous fire consume the
rebels.

The next episode is built explicitly on this. The people now complain to
Moses and Aaron that “You killed YHWH’s people!” (17:6). Apparently slow
learners, they once again direct their complaints, about an act that was
manifestly the deity’s, at Moses and Aaron personally. Again the attack
is handled by God, this time by a plague. Again it is the interceding
actions of Moses and especially Aaron that save the nation from further
destruction. At divine command, Moses places the staffs that represent
each of the tribes inside the Tent of Meeting. On the next day the staff
of the tribe of Levi, with Aaron’s name inscribed on it, has blossomed
and grown almonds, clearly confirming once and for all YHWH’s selection
of Aaron for the priesthood. YHWH orders Moses to place Aaron’s staff in
front of the ark “for a sign to rebels” (17:25). We learn the
consequence of this in the subsequent episode: Meribah. There Moses
refers to the people as rebels, strikes the rock with this miraculous
staff of Aaron’s, and so Aaron shares Moses’ fate: they both are to die
without reaching the promised land.

As a consequence of being condemned to forty years in the wilderness in
the episode of the scouts, Israel abandons its direct route of entry
into the land from the south. After spending time moving about in the
Sinai, the people take a longer route that will lead them through the
territory to the east of the land and eventually to an entry from the
east. This brings them into contact with the peoples of this area, who
are already familiar from the book of Genesis: Edomites, Amorites,
Moabites, and Midianites. The next several episodes relate Israel’s
encounters with these groups. They come first to the territory of Edom,
the land of Esau’s descendants, and the Israelites appeal with due
diplomacy to their “brothers” to allow them to pass through their
territory. The Edomites refuse and threaten an armed response
(20:14–21). Israel therefore avoids Edom, which means a circuitous route
and lost access to food and water. It comes as no surprise, then, when
the people rebel again in the next chapter over the lack of food and
water. The notable new element in their complaint this time is that they
finally seem to have assimilated the fact that it is not merely Moses
but God who is directing them. Therefore: “the people spoke against
God—and against Moses” (21:5). This time YHWH plagues them with deadly
snakes. Again they appeal to Moses (“We’ve sinned, because we spoke
against YHWH and against you”), again Moses intercedes, and God provides
a remedy: the bronze snake on a pole.

The Israelites’ eastern route next takes them to the territory of the
Amorite kings Sihon and Og, and Israel makes the same request for
peaceful passage that they have made to Edom. Both Sihon and Og attack
Israel militarily, and both are utterly defeated. Thus Israel comes to
acquire territory on the eastern side of the Jordan River, outside the
borders of the promised land (Num 21:21–35).

Israel’s conquest of the Amorite territories in turn leads to conflict
with the Moabites, who are the descendants of Abraham’s nephew Lot (Gen
19:36–37), and the Midianites, who are descendants of Abraham himself
(Gen 25:2). Explicitly as a consequence of Israel’s conquests of the
Amorites, the Moabite king Balak acts preemptively against Israel
(22:2–3). Military might has not been successful against Israel, and so
Balak, allied with Midian, turns to more transcendent means, hiring the
seer Balaam to put a curse on Israel. But instead of cursing Israel,
Balaam blesses them, and Balak’s plan is frustrated. Moab and Midian
then try another nonmilitary, albeit more earthy, approach to the
Israelites. Moabite and Midianite women seduce the Israelites, first
sexually and then to their religious worship at Baal Peor. Moses orders
the execution of those who were associated with Baal Peor, but the
culminating event of the Baal Peor apostasy is not Moses’ action but
rather that of Phinehas, Aaron’s grandson. When an Israelite man and a
Midianite woman openly pass before Moses and the people at the Tent of
Meeting to enter the tent’s inner sanctum, it is Phinehas who goes after
them and impales them both on his spear while they are in the sexual act
on the floor (25:8). The Israelites subsequently take revenge on the
Midianites, involving the slaughter of the males and adult females (the
severity of the recompense being apparently the consequence of the
severity of the offense in the ritual realm) and the execution of
Balaam, who, we learn, had devised the Baal Peor scheme (31:8,16).

When Phinehas plunges his spear through the couple in the Tent, he halts
a plague that had stricken the people (25:8–9,18–19). The account of the
revenge on the Midianites also refers to this plague (31:16). Earlier we
noted an account of a plague in the aftermath of the Korah episode. The
matter of plagues in cases of ritual offense is another cohesive element
uniting the chain of events in Numbers. The first section of the book,
covering the preparations for the journey, includes the establishment of
the Levites as the Israelite group that is to perform the religious
services at the Tent of Meeting. YHWH commands the Levites to serve at
the Tabernacle and “make atonement” for the people so that “there will
not be a plague in the children of Israel when the children of Israel
would come near to the Holy” (8:19). Both the Korah and the Phinehas
episodes are then about persons who step beyond the formal limits of the
holy. Korah and his people, declaring that “all the people are holy,”
dare to burn incense; and the Israelite man and Midianite woman dare to
enter the interior of the Tabernacle, an area known precisely as “the
Holy” (Exod 26:33). Both actions result in plagues, the two plagues are
halted by the intervention of Aaron and Phinehas respectively, and thus
the divisions and status of the Levites and the Aaronid priests are
established. YHWH awards Phinehas a covenant of eternal priesthood in
Israel for having “made atonement” for the people (Num 25:11–13).

Following the plague, YHWH orders a second census, which likewise
recalls the preparatory actions of the first section of Numbers, in
which the first census was taken. It is now confirmed that no one who
was counted in the census at the beginning of the book has survived
except Caleb and Joshua, as decreed in the episode of the scouts
(26:63–65). God designates Joshua as Moses’ successor as leader of the
nation, preparing for the fulfillment of the decree of Moses’ death in
the Meribah episode (27:15–23). In sum, various lines of action and law
run as threads that bind the episodes together and now converge in the
concluding chapters of the book. Everything follows naturally. The new
census is naturally followed by matters of the distribution of the land
and laws of inheritance of property, including inheritance by women and
Levites. There is also a section on the calendar that is to be followed
in the land, including the proper observance of the Sabbath, new moons,
and holidays (28; 29). The book thus concludes by picturing the people
at the end of the journey, ready to arrive in the land, with a leader, a
priestly establishment, a constitution of laws, and a system to
distribute the land. To bring it together, the list of Israel’s
itinerary in Numbers 33 formally shows the sequence of the journey to be
the unifying line of the book.

Like the Jacob cycle of stories in Genesis, the book of Numbers is a
collection of stories that appear superficially to be loosely connected
but that are in fact bound by chronological and geographical flow, by
continuous themes, and by a causal sequence in the progression of the
story. This prepares us for Moses’ great speech in Deuteronomy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMENTARY ON THE TORAH

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The book of Deuteronomy pictures the last events of Israel’s forty years
in the wilderness and the last events of Moses’ life. It ends with
Moses’ death, which is the climax and culmination that the book of
Numbers lacked. The scene: The people are at the end of a journey. They
are located east of the Jordan River, at the border of their promised
land, in the plains of Moab. They are about to enter a new land and a
settled life. And their leader is about to die. It is no surprise that
Moses tells them not to be afraid. There is every reason for them to be
in need of such reassurance. As for Moses, he knows he is about to die,
and he is not accepting it with wise acquiescence. He pleads with YHWH
to let him live to cross over into the land; but YHWH tells him, “Don’t
go on speaking to me anymore of this thing.” And Moses gives a glorious
farewell speech. It starts off unattractively to the audience, a review
of history, mostly unpleasant, a criticism of the people’s unworthiness;
then a lengthy list of laws, reviewing some old ones and adding many new
ones; then a list of blessings and horrible curses; then a beautiful
conclusion: encouraging, inspiring. And then he ends with songs.

The narrative has come a long distance from the cosmic Genesis 1. Now,
for the whole of the last book of the Five Books of Moses, it is a
picture of a group of people listening to the speech of a man. No seas
split; no angels appear; there are in fact no miracles at all in
Deuteronomy. There is rather the retelling of the miracles. The acts of
God, of Moses, and of the people now themselves become part of the
background, and the foreground belongs to Moses’ words.
