------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

17

¹“You shall not sacrifice to YHWH, your God, a bull or a sheep in which
will be any injury, any bad thing, because that is an offensive thing of
YHWH, your God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“If there will be found among you, in one of your gates that YHWH, your
God, is giving you, a man or woman who will do what is bad in the eyes
of YHWH, your God, to violate His covenant,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ and will go and serve other gods and bow to them and to the sun or to
the moon or to any of the array of the skies, which I did not command,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ and it will be told to you and you will hear it, and you will inquire
well, and, here, it is true, the thing is right, this offensive thing
has been done in Israel,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ then you shall bring that man or that woman who did this bad thing out
to your gates, the man or the woman, and you shall stone them with
stones so they die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶“On the word of two witnesses or three witnesses shall the one who is
to die be put to death. One shall not be put to death on the word of one
witness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ The witnesses’ hand shall be on him first to put him to death, and all
the people’s hand after that. So you shall burn away what is bad from
among you.

---

Footnote 17:7. witnesses first … all the people after. Numerous commentators
discuss the first half of this verse but not the second. It is of course
significant that witnesses must know that, if they testify against
someone in a capital case, they will have to strike the first blows
against the defendant themselves. That conveys vividly how serious their
testimony is. But it is at least as significant that all the people
participate in the execution as well. Capital punishment is the act of a
community—in ancient Israel and even more so in democracies. In biblical
law, the community must know that if they are going to have capital
punishment they must understand that this means that the community as a
whole is taking lives. So that there can be no mistaking this point, the
entire community must participate in the execution. In postbiblical
societies where the entire people does not participate personally, this
point may easily be forgotten, but it is true all the same: a community
that has capital punishment is responsible as a community for the lives
it takes. It is not just the executioner or just the witnesses or just
the courts.

Perhaps this fact—that in ancient Israel all the people had to carry out
the execution—was one of the forces that led Israel to make capital
punishment almost impossible in rabbinic law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸“If a matter for judgment will be too daunting for you, between blood
and blood, between law and law, and between injury and injury, matters
of disputes in your gates, then you shall get up and go up to the place
that YHWH, your God, will choose.

---

Footnote 17:8. If a matter for judgment will be too daunting for you. In every
law code there must be a mechanism for change and for application to new
and difficult situations. Even if the law is divine law, there must be
such a mechanism, and the Torah recognizes this and provides for it. It
directs that in such difficult questions, the authorities (judges and
priests; i.e., authorities in law and religion) in each age shall
determine what to do. This has always been done in Judaism. The most
obvious distinction among the movements in Judaism has been their
different views of how the law changes. The primary consideration when
authorities, including scholars and rabbis, determine that a law is
changed is that they do so with wisdom and reverence, and not with
arrogance.

Footnote 17:8. blood and blood. Cases involving the taking of life.

Footnote 17:8. between law and law. Cases that are complex because more than one
law applies.

Footnote 17:8. between injury and injury. Cases involving physical hurt.

Footnote 17:8. disputes. The term (Hebrew rîb) meant a quarrel, as in the
quarreling at the rock that leads to the name Meribah (Exodus 17;
Numbers 20), and it came to refer to a lawsuit, a legal dispute.
Israel’s prophets use it to describe God’s judgment of Israel in legal
terms (Hos 12:3; Mic 6:2). This is known in biblical scholarship as a
“covenant lawsuit.” The covenant between God and Israel is a legal
relationship, formulated in the legal terminology of the ancient Near
East (see the comment on Exod 20:1). In a rîb oracle, the prophet
describes God as bringing a case against His people for violating the
covenant, which can end in judgment and punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And you shall come to the Levite priests and to the judge who will be
in those days, and you shall inquire, and they will tell you the matter
of judgment.

---

Footnote 17:9. the Levite priests. Historically, originally all Levites were
priests. Later the Levite group that identified itself as descendants of
Aaron took exclusive hold of the priesthood and limited all the other
Levites to a secondary role. Thereafter a distinction was made between
priests and Levites. Deuteronomy reflects the original status of all
Levites and does not make this distinction between priests and Levites.
(I have discussed this history of priesthood in Who Wrote the Bible?)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And you shall do according to the word on the matter that they will
tell you from that place that YHWH will choose, and you shall be
watchful to do according to everything that they will instruct you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ You shall do it according to the word of the instruction that they
will give you and according to the judgment that they will say to you.
You shall not turn from the thing that they will tell you, right or
left.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And the man who will act presumptuously, not listening to the priest
who is standing to serve YHWH, your God, there, or to the judge: that
man shall die. So you shall burn away what is bad from Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And all the people will listen and fear and won’t act presumptuously
anymore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴“When you’ll come to the land that YHWH, your God, is giving you, and
you’ll take possession of it and live in it, and you’ll say, ‘Let me set
a king over me like all the nations that are around me,’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ you shall set a king over you whom YHWH, your God, will choose! You
shall set a king from among your brothers over you. You may not put a
foreign man, who is not your brother, over you.

---

Footnote 17:15. you shall set a king over you. The Torah permits Israel to have a
king if they wish. It is placed in their hands to decide if they want
one: “When … you’ll say, ‘Let me set a king over me … ,’ you shall set a
king over you.” But the king must be chosen by God (see the next
comment). Later, Gideon and Samuel will question whether it is right for
Israel to have a king, saying that God should be Israel’s king (Judg
8:23; 1 Sam 8:6). But they do not base their opposition to monarchy on
the Torah. Both Gideon and Samuel are judges and also priests (Judg
8:24–27), and they naturally think of God’s will as being properly
expressed through priests, and so they see kings as a threat to the
order that they know. But the Torah permits the people to have kings if
they wish. And so God tells Samuel to give the people a king, even
though their wish for a king, in that particular case, involves a
rejection of God (1 Sam 8:7,22).

Footnote 17:15. whom God will choose. This means that a prophet must designate
the king as chosen by God. Thus Samuel designates Saul and David, Nathan
designates Solomon, and Ahijah designates Jeroboam. The stories of the
kings of Israel and Judah in the books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles
convey that kings are acceptable if the people want them, but their
power is limited and balanced by the power of prophets. And kings who do
not listen to prophets, or who imprison or execute them, do so at their
peril.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ Only, he shall not get himself many horses, and he shall not bring the
people back to Egypt in order to get many horses, when YHWH has said to
you, ‘You shall not go back this way ever again.’

---

Footnote 17:16. not get himself many horses. Maintaining forces with a great many
horses means the development of a small upper class plus a large class
of serfs or servants to support and serve them. This is one of several
laws in the Torah that work to counter the development of such a
two-tiered feudal system. And so, when King David defeats Hadadezer and
captures 1,700 chariots and horsemen, he hamstrings all but a small
number of the horses (2 Sam 8:4). Why would he deliberately give up a
prize of such tremendous value? Because he is obeying this Law of the
King.

Footnote 17:16. YHWH has said to you, ‘You shall not go back.’ No such words from
God are reported prior to this. This may appear to be a problem, but it
may simply be that this is Moses’ report of God’s words on this matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And he shall not get himself many wives, so his heart will not turn
away. And he shall not get himself very much silver and gold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And it will be, when he sits on his kingdom’s throne, that he shall
write himself a copy of this instruction on a scroll from in front of
the Levite priests.

---

Footnote 17:18. a copy of this instruction. It is unclear whether this means a
copy of this Law of the King or a copy of the full law code of
Deuteronomy in which it is now contained. In either case, this means
that Israel has a constitutional monarchy. Baruch Halpern has shown
substantial evidence that Israel’s kings were bound by this Law of the
King from the time of the first king, Saul (Halpern, The Constitution of
the Monarchy in Israel). That means that Israel was historically a
constitutional monarchy, with a written constitution, more than a
thousand years B.C.E.

Footnote 17:18. a copy … from in front of the Levite priests. That is, the
Levites have the text of the law, and the king makes himself a copy from
the text that they have before them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And it shall be with him, and he shall read it all the days of his
life, so that he will learn to fear YHWH, his God, to observe all the
words of this instruction and these laws, to do them,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 17:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ so his heart will not be elevated above his brothers, and so he will
not turn from the commandment, right or left, and so he will extend days
over his kingdom, he and his sons, within Israel.
