------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

30

¹ And it will be, when all these things, the blessing and the curse that
I’ve put in front of you, will come upon you, and you’ll store it in
your heart among the nations to which YHWH, your God, has driven you,

---

Footnote 30:1. your God has driven you. The word “driven” is ironic here. It has
been used three times until now, always referring to persons who would
drive Israelites away from their God (Deut 13:6,11,14). But now it
describes how YHWH drives Israel away to other lands because of Israel’s
apostasy. The term is thus another allusion to the fact of divine
punishment to fit the crime, which is to say: there is justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² and you’ll come back to YHWH, your God, and listen to His voice,
according to everything that I command you today, you and your children,
with all your heart and with all your soul,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ that YHWH, your God, will bring back your captivity and be merciful to
you. And He’ll come back and gather you from all the peoples to which
YHWH, your God, has scattered you.

---

Footnote 30:3. bring back your captivity. This expression occurs about
twenty-five times in the Tanak. It is grammatically unclear. The verb
([image][image]b) would normally be in the Hiphil, but here (and
usually) it is in the intransitive Qal. The noun may reflect the root
[image]wb, “bring back” (making it a cognate accusative with the verb),
or it may reflect the root [image]bh, “captive.” On the former root, the
phrase would mean “to produce a coming back.” On the latter root, it
would mean “to bring back a captivity.” These two meanings are very
close to each other in any case. Those who take this phrase to mean
figuratively “to restore your fortunes” have a good parallel in Job
42:10; but all the occurrences in Jeremiah, which is linked closely with
Deuteronomy, fit the meaning of “coming back” or “captivity” far better.
Note especially Jer 30:16–23 and 48:46–47, in which this expression
occurs in proximity to the related word for captivity: [image]ebî.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ If you’ll be driven to the end of the skies, YHWH, your God, will
gather you from there, and He’ll take you from there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And YHWH, your God, will bring you to the land that your fathers
possessed, and you’ll take possession of it, and He’ll be good to you
and multiply you more than your fathers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And YHWH, your God, will circumcise your heart and your seed’s heart so
as to love YHWH, your God, with all your heart and with all your soul so
that you’ll live.

---

Footnote 30:6. God will circumcise your heart. Earlier, Moses directs the people
to circumcise their hearts themselves (see Deut 10:16 and the comment
there), but now he speaks of God circumcising their hearts for them. The
difference is that now he is speaking of a future condition: the people
will have violated the covenant, suffered the curses, and turned back to
their God; and God, in response, will bring them back and then will
circumcise their hearts. This in turn will enable them to love the deity
with all their hearts and souls—which Moses had commanded them to do
earlier as well. The divine-human relationship is pictured as mutual.
Humans require the experience of being away from their God, on their
own. And then, more experienced, more understanding, having suffered and
grown, humans look to God anew. And then the new encounter with the
divine transforms them.

Footnote 30:6. your seed’s heart. Meaning: the hearts of your progeny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And YHWH, your God, will put all these curses on your enemies and on
those who hate you who have pursued you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And you’ll come back and listen to YHWH’s voice and do all His
commandments that I command you today.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And YHWH, your God, will give you extra of all your hand’s work, of the
fruit of your womb and of the fruit of your animals and the fruit of
your land for good. Because YHWH will come back to have satisfaction
over you for good as He had satisfaction over your fathers,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ when you’ll listen to the voice of YHWH, your God, to observe His
commandments and His laws, written in this scroll of instruction, when
you’ll come back to YHWH, your God, with all your heart and with all
your soul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹“Because this commandment that I command you today: it’s not too
wondrous for you, and it’s not too far.

---

Footnote 30:11. it’s not too wondrous for you. Now Moses finishes what he started
to say ten verses earlier about the hidden things belonging to God and
the revealed things belonging to humans (29:28). In one of the most
beautiful passages in the Torah (vv. 11–14), he explains what this
meant: The commandments are not enigmatic, they do not reside in a
distant realm, and they do not require an intermediary. They are already
made known. And they are within a human’s ability to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² It’s not in the skies, that one would say, ‘Who will go up for us to
the skies and get it for us and enable us to hear it so we’ll do it?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And it’s not across the sea, that one would say, ‘Who will cross for
us, across the sea, and get it for us and enable us to hear it so we’ll
do it?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ But the thing is very close to you, in your mouth, and in your heart,
to do it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵“See: I’ve put in front of you today life and good, and death and bad,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ in that I command you today to love YHWH, your God, to go in His ways
and to observe His commandments and His laws and His judgments so you’ll
live and multiply and bless YHWH, your God, in the land to which you’re
coming to take possession of it.

---

Footnote 30:16. so you’ll live and multiply. This is a change of wording from the
beginning of the Torah, where the command is to “be fruitful and
multiply” (Gen 1:28). The command to grow in numbers is for the purpose
of life. As the human population grows to the point that its number is a
threat to life, humankind and its leaders need enormous wisdom to
determine what to do. The wording there in Genesis is: “And God blessed
them, and God said to them, ‘Be fruitful and multiply … ’” (Gen 1:28).
That first commandment of the Torah is thus presented not as a strict
order, but as a blessing. And here at the end of the Torah as well, the
text is: “so you’ll live and multiply and bless YHWH.” In the Torah, the
creator blesses humans with the opportunity to grow, and humans will
bless their creator for it once it is fulfilled. The Bible’s first
commandment is now becoming humankind’s greatest challenge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ But if your heart will turn away, and you won’t listen, and you’ll be
driven so that you’ll bow to other gods and serve them,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ I’ve told you today that you’ll perish. You won’t extend days on the
land to which you’re crossing the Jordan to come to take possession of
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ I call the skies and the earth to witness regarding you today: I’ve
put life and death in front of you, blessing and curse. And you shall
choose life, so you’ll live, you and your seed,

---

Footnote 30:19. choose life. The theme of the path to life began early in Moses’
speech (Deut 4:1) and culminates here in the last words of the speech.
This focus at the conclusion of the Torah returns us to the Torah’s
opening: the loss of the tree of life. Humans lose access to the tree of
life as the price of having gained access to the tree of knowledge of
good and bad. Now the people are told, “I’ve put in front of you life
and good, blessing and curse.” Using the knowledge of good and bad, and
choosing to do good, is the path back to life—not necessarily eternal
life (though who knows?), but meaningful life, fulfilling life. As the
book of Proverbs says about knowledge and wisdom: “It is a tree of
life.” And Jews sing this verse from Proverbs each Sabbath after reading
the Torah and returning it to the ark.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 30:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ to love YHWH, your God, to listen to His voice and to cling to Him,
because He is your life and the extension of your days to reside on the
land that YHWH swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, to give to them.”

---

Footnote 30:20. to cling to Him. “Cling” is the same term that is used for man’s
attachment to woman at the beginning of the Torah (Gen 2:24). This is
part of a string of terms in this passage (vv. 15–20) that call to mind
the opening chapters of the Torah: life, death, good and bad, the skies
and earth, the ground, the day (cf. “in the day” and “in the day you eat
from it,” Gen 2:4,17), “your seed,” be fruitful, to give, to tell, to
command (cf. Gen 3:11), to watch (or observe, Hebrew [image]mr), and to
listen to the voice (of God; cf. “You listened to your woman’s voice,”
Gen 3:17). And these are preceded by references to fruit (Deut 30:9),
and to the skies and the sea (30:12–13). This cluster of language here
in the last sentences of Moses’ address forms a great connection back to
the start of Genesis and a reminder of the unity of the Torah.

Footnote 30:20. He is your life. This can also be understood to mean “It is your
life.” Translators are split on this. The former means that Moses is
saying that God is the people’s life and the source of their being in
their land a long time. The latter means that the people’s choice to
love, listen, and cling to God is their life and the source of lengthy
time in the land. That is, the question is whether it is God or it is
people’s feeling about God that brings this about. I do not know which
is correct.
