------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

34 ¹ And Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, the top of
Pisgah, which is facing Jericho. And YHWH showed him all of the land,
Gilead to Dan,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² and all of Naphtali and the land of Ephraim and Manasseh and all the
land of Judah to the far sea

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ and the Negeb and the plain, the valley of Jericho, city of the palms,
to Zoar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And YHWH said to him, “This is the land that I swore to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, ‘I’ll give it to your seed.’ I’ve caused
you to see it with your eyes, but you won’t pass there.”

---

Footnote 34:4. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This is the last mention of them in the
Torah. The Torah returns to them and to the promises to them, but it
does not end with those promises fulfilled. It ends with Moses looking
out at the land, with the fulfillment lying in the future. Some have
said that the original unit was the Hexateuch rather than the
Pentateuch; that is, that the story more properly concludes in the book
of Joshua, when the people come to live in the land that was promised to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But the Torah ends here, with the future,
with the story still to be told. It is a message to the reader that this
is not meant to be just a story of the past. I wrote at the beginning of
this commentary that the Torah’s story is rich in background, always
presuming what has come before it (and I shall discuss below how it is
also enriched by its reader’s knowledge of what is coming later in the
story). Now I would add that it has a third perspective in that it
always points beyond itself, to the destiny of Israel and humankind in
the rest of the Tanak that follows, and, for millions of readers, in
their continuing life beyond the conclusion of the Bible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And Moses, YHWH’s servant, died there in the land of Moab by YHWH’s
mouth,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ and He buried him in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth Peor.
And no man knows his burial place to this day.

---

Footnote 34:6. He buried him. This is usually understood to mean that God buries
Moses. We should note that Qumran, Septuagint, and some manuscripts of
the Samaritan tradition read “they buried him.” This presumably means
that the people bury him. That would imply a completely different
picture of Moses’ death. He does not die alone on the mountain. After he
sees the land from the top of the mountain he goes down to a lower part
of the mountain, where he dies with others around him, and then his
people bury him. It is remarkable that a scribal difference of a single
letter (a waw at the end of the word [image], making it plural: “they
buried”) leaves open such a significant point: Does Moses end his life
with God or with his fellow human beings? Perhaps it is meaningful (and
appropriate?) that some scribes understood it one way, and other scribes
understood it the other way. Moses lives his life in a zone between God
and humans. We saw in the matter of the golden calf at Sinai that when
Moses speaks to God he represents the people, and when he speaks to the
people he represents God. (See the comment on Exod 32:19.)

Footnote 34:6. no man knows his burial place to this day. Ancestor veneration is
linked with the actual grave site. One can go to the so-called tombs of
Rachel and David in Israel today and see people praying to Rachel and
David there to answer their prayers or to intercede with God. In this
report of the nonknowledge of Moses’ burial place, therefore, the
concern is that such veneration and prayer for intercession is not
possible with Moses. It comes as a sharp contrast to all the other
reports about burials in the family tomb in the Torah and elsewhere in
the Bible.

If we understand the first part of this verse to read “He buried him,”
then it would suggest that God does not desire such things to take place
at Moses’ tomb. If we read “they buried him,” it is harder to interpret
why the Israelites themselves would make his burial site unknown. One
possibility is that their leaders, in particular the high priest
Eleazar, likewise do not want veneration at Moses’ tomb. Another is that
they are burying Moses in Moab, outside the land of Israel, and so they
fear that the grave would be mistreated by foreign people. They cannot
take Moses’ body to the promised land with them because of the
biological necessity of immediate burial. The bodies of Jacob and Joseph
are carried back to Israel for burial, but in those cases we are
specifically informed that the bodies have been embalmed (Gen 50:1,26).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And Moses was a hundred twenty years old at his death. His eye was not
dim, and his vitality had not fled.

---

Footnote 34:7. a hundred twenty years old. Moses gets the maximum that anyone can
live according to YHWH’s decree in Genesis: “My spirit won’t stay in
humankind forever, since they’re also flesh; and their days shall be a
hundred twenty years” (Gen 6:3).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And the children of Israel mourned Moses in the plains of Moab thirty
days. And the days of weeping, the mourning of Moses, ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And Joshua son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom because Moses
had laid his hands on him, and the children of Israel listened to him.
And they did as YHWH commanded Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And a prophet did not rise again in Israel like Moses, whom YHWH knew
face-to-face,

---

Footnote 34:10. face-to-face. This does not appear to be meant literally. See the
comments on Exod 33:11 and Deut 5:4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ with all the signs and the wonders that YHWH sent him to do in the
land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to all his land,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Deuteronomy 34:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² and with all the strong hand and with all the great fear that Moses
made before the eyes of all Israel.

---

Footnote 34:12. that Moses made. Here at the end of the Torah, for the first
time, the strong hand and the fear are ascribed to Moses himself rather
than, as usual, to God (Deut 3:24; 4:34)! This is a surprise because
Moses has so often told the people that it is God, not himself, who has
done these things. Perhaps it is a final tribute to Moses.

Closing comment:

We should appreciate the significance of the Jewish practice of
returning immediately to Genesis 1 anew after completing the reading of
Deuteronomy. It conveys the point, with each new reading of the Torah,
that the Torah (and the entire Bible, as well) is a whole, that our
concern is with the totality as well as the individual parts. That may
seem obvious, but it is easy to lose sight of because we are used to
studying the text in small units. The weekly reading is only a few
chapters. Then the rabbi is constrained by time to comment on only a
small portion of that reading. Both the Christian and the Jewish sermon
are thus limited to a small corner of the tapestry. Likewise in Bible
study groups and in Hebrew and Sunday school classes, we usually deal
with a single verse or story. We would do well to learn from Rashi, who
never lost sight of the whole while making comments on the parts. His
commentary implicitly reminds us at its outset that the word TaNaK
(Tōr[image]h, N[image]bî’îm/Prophets, Kĕtubîm/Writings) stands for a
whole-composed-of-parts, because in commenting on Gen 1:1 Rashi brings
in citations from all parts of the Bible: from Torah (Genesis and
Exodus), the Prophets (Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, and Amos), and the
Writings (Psalms and Proverbs). Even the seemingly obvious fact that
Jews study the weekly readings in order, rather than commenting on
whatever passage one chooses each week, reinforces the idea that, even
as we focus on the component, our concern ultimately is with the full
narrative, with continuity, with context—with Torah.

At the beginning of this commentary, I emphasized the point that the
Bible is rich in background, that the events in the first reading,
Parashat Bereshit, remain as an essential substratum in all that follows
in the Bible’s story. Every biblical scene will be laden—artistically,
theologically, psychologically, spiritually—with all that has come
before. The broad concern with the earth that is established in the
first parashah remains. So when the story narrows to the divine
relationship with Abraham, it is still with the ultimate aim that this
will be “a blessing to all the families of the earth.” Now I want to add
the opposite point: that one also has a finer sense of what is happening
in each biblical episode, starting with the creation, if one reads it
with consciousness of what is coming.

For example: the Sabbath is set in the very structure of the universe,
but for most readers the Sabbath draws its significance in Genesis 2:1–3
not only from its being a feature of the creation but from the readers’
knowledge that it is to be a prime commandment later, one of the Ten
Commandments, and will be identified as the sign of the relationship
between God and the Israelites (Exod 31:16–17). Just try to read about
the seventh day in Genesis 2 without thinking about what Shabbat comes
to mean later.

Some things change dramatically over the course of the Hebrew Bible’s
story: from an undefined divine-human relationship in Parashat Bereshit
to a series of covenants in the books that follow; from a depiction of
all humankind in Genesis 1–11 to a focus specifically through Israel for
many books thereafter; from explicit depiction of divine power in
Genesis 1 to divine hiddenness in Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther; and as the
face of God becomes more hidden through the course of the narrative,
humans grow up and must take ever more responsibility for their world.

When I go to a movie or play, I prefer to know as little as possible
about its story in advance. Few of us are able to come to the Bible that
way. It is too well-known. But few of us experience our knowledge of
things that come later in the Bible as spoiling Bereshit for us the way
it might spoil a mystery story to know “who done it.” When we read the
difficult account of the divine beings and the human women in Genesis 6,
which results in the deity’s setting a 120-year limit on human life
(6:3), we gain rather than lose something by knowing that the Torah will
end with an announcement that Moses lives the maximum and dies at the
age of 120 (Deut 34:7).

Likewise, we can have a richer appreciation of the story of Cain and
Abel if we know that fratricide will become a recurring theme—Jacob and
Esau, Joseph and his brothers, Abimelek and his brothers, Absalom and
Amnon, the woman of Tekoa’s story of two brothers—culminating in
Solomon’s executing his brother Adonijah and thus establishing the
stability of the Davidic line on the throne of Israel. It is no longer
just a tale of Cain’s fate; it is rather an introduction and first
installment in an ongoing, agonizing biblical treatment of the envies,
rivalries, and affections of siblings.

And we can better understand humankind’s loss of the tree of life as the
price of gaining knowledge of good and bad if we know that life and
death, and good and bad, will become crucial themes in Moses’ last
speech in Deuteronomy. And we understand it better still if we know that
later, in the book of Proverbs, the highest form of knowledge of good
and bad in the Bible—wisdom—will be characterized this way: “It is a
tree of life!” (Prov 3:18). And so Jews sing this passage from Proverbs
when they return the Torah to the ark after reading it each week. The
garden of Eden and the tree of life are not destroyed in Genesis; they
are rendered inaccessible. The initial divine-human alienation that is
marked by the eviction from paradise, therefore, is not necessarily to
be understood as final. The possibility of human return to a condition
in which the creator is so close as to be perceived as walking among
humans in the breeze of the day (Gen 3:8) is left open. Cherubs guard
the path back to the tree of life, but this, too, can be understood
better if one knows what is coming: golden cherubs will spread their
wings over the ark and its contents inside the Temple. The cherubs keep
watch over the path to the tree of life, and their images symbolically
keep watch over the keys to the path back: covenant, Torah, knowledge,
wisdom.

How does the end of the Torah indeed lead us back to the beginning (as
well as on to Joshua)?

At the beginning of the Torah, the tree of life is lost, and death
becomes the fate of all humans. Now the Torah ends with the death of
Moses. At the beginning, Cain worries that “I’ll be hidden from your
presence” (literally, from your face). Now God tells Moses, “Let me hide
my face from them; I’ll see what their future will be.” Back in Genesis,
God promises a land to Abraham for his descendants. Now God shows Moses
the land that God promised. In Genesis, Abraham “passes” through the
land. Now God tells Moses: you won’t “pass” there (34:4). In Genesis,
Isaac’s eyes were dim. Now we are told that Moses’ eye was not dim.
Genesis ends with Jacob’s blessing of twelve sons (The Blessing of
Jacob, Genesis 49). Now the Torah ends with Moses’ blessing of twelve
tribes (The Blessing of Moses, Deuteronomy 33). Genesis recounts the
first merging of “spirit” and “wisdom” in a man: Joseph (Gen 41:38–39).
Now these two words are applied to Joshua (Deut 34:9); and Joshua,
coming from the tribe of Ephraim, is a descendant of Joseph.

We find all of these (and many more) reminiscences and denouements at
the end of the Torah that remind us of things we found at the beginning.
But this look backward is only half of what we get—because our custom is
to start over immediately, going back to Genesis. So we begin the Torah
looking forward. Now when we go back to Genesis and read about the
120-year limit on human life, we will think of how Moses arrived at it.
Now when we read about the divine promise of the land to Abraham in
Genesis, we may think of Moses’ reminder to the people that this promise
is about to come true at the end of Deuteronomy.

And note: the promise to Abraham is not fulfilled at the end of the
Torah. It is fulfilled in Joshua. So the last chapter of the Torah
invites us to do both: to turn back to Genesis and to read on in Joshua.

The Torah thus involves a looking forward and a looking back, a linking
of past and future. It is a strange concept of time: linear and cyclical
at the same time, historical and timeless at the same time. It is the
first known work of history on earth: telling a record of events through
a progression of time on a line. Yet we read that record in a cyclical
manner, always returning to the beginning. And so Returning becomes one
of the central concepts of Judaism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This work contains the Hebrew text as well as the English translation.

Following the pattern of the Hebrew language, this book opens and reads
from right to left.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

EPILOGUES

“As exceptional for the 2000’s as Rashi was for the 1000’s, this is the
definitive Jewish commentary on the Five Books of Moses.”

—BARUCH HALPERN,

Chaiken Family Chair in Jewish Studies, Pennsylvania State University

“Richard Elliott Friedman has created a pathbreaking translation and
commentary. His intelligent use of biblical and archeological
scholarship consistently yields new insights into the Bible, while his
spiritual sensibility allows him to emphasize the rich religious
meanings that inhere in Torah. Jews and Christians alike will hail this
work! “

—RABBI DAVID ELLENSON, Ph.D.,

President, Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion

“This is the way to study Torah! Friedman has produced a commentary that
is both traditional and modern, drawing on the best of medieval
commentaries and modern scholarship but adding his own perspective as
well. He models for us the most intelligent—and traditional—way to make
the Torah live in our own lives.”

—RABBI ELLIOT N. DORFF, Ph.D.,

Rector and Distinguished Professor of Philosophy, University of Judaism

“A vast array of insights. Every page of the commentary shows Friedman’s
keen eye for subtle nuances and telling literary details. I would
recommend this book to all Bible readers, but especially as a valuable
resource for those who are engaged in serious, ongoing Torah study.”

—ALAN COOPER,

Professor of Bible, Jewish Theological Seminary

and Union Theological Seminary

“A commentary that is both learned and engaging, consistently reaching
out to the reader in order to make the Biblical text relevant to
contemporary spiritual and ethical perplexity. Lucid, judicious,
provocative; a major achievement.”

—ARNOLD EISEN,

Professor of Religious Studies, Stanford University

“This is a culminating work by a remarkable scholar. Friedman has had a
place in the company of the great scholars of the recent past; now we
find him another place of equal value and importance among an older
generation of legendary commentators on the Hebrew Scriptures: Kimhi and
Abarbanel, Rashbam and Nachmanides, and that perennial master of the
written Word, Rashi. We will leave the comparison at that point, in
order to emphasize the remarkable scope and depth, the brilliance and
winsomeness of this new but constant Companion to the Holy Scriptures.”

—DAVID NOEL FREEDMAN,

General Editor, The Anchor Bible

“Richard Friedman not only provides a fresh and exciting translation in
the real language of ordinary people, he also presents a discerning and
original commentary. With him as guide, the Five Books of Moses take on
new life. Here we see, in his language, ‘problems we had not seen, old
problems that had not been solved,’—together with his always-compelling
solutions. He lives up to his well-earned name as the single most
interesting mind working on the Bible in any language today.”

—JACOB NEUSNER,

Senior Fellow, Institute of Advanced Theology,

and Research Professor of Religion and Theology, Bard College

“Friedman’s reading is close and keen—able to dig out half-hidden
details and problems in the text and offer convincing explanations of
them. Yet none of what he writes is remote and obscure; it is rather in
easily accessible prose, which brings out the continuing vitality and
power of the Biblical text in a compelling way. He has, especially, a
deep and comprehensive grasp of the interconnectedness of the Bible,
showing again and again how individual verses and passages echo and
build on one another.”

—PETER MACHINIST,

Hancock Professor of Hebrew and Other Oriental Languages, Harvard
University

“At last—a translation of the Torah that finds a successful balance
between the literal and the idiomatic. And at last—an accompanying
commentary informed by the best classical and modern scholarship and
also exquisitely sensitive to the questions and concerns of the
contemporary student of Torah.”

—CAROL MEYERS,

Professor of Biblical Studies and Archaeology, Duke University

“Richard Friedman’s Commentary on the Torah is unique and
wonderful—intelligent, courageous, creative, and playful. It could only
have been created by a world class scholar. It could only have been
crafted by a great lover of Bible. It could only have been written by
Richard Elliott Friedman.”

—RABBI BRADLEY SHAVIT ARTSON,

Dean, Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies, University of Judaism

“Like the prototypical commentator, Rashi, Richard Friedman conveys a
vast amount of learning with a light touch. His translations are fresh
and vibrant. His masterful commentary blends scholarly precision,
literary sensitivity, and spiritual reflection.”

—DANIEL MATT,

author of God and the Big Bang and The Essential Kabbalah

“An eye-opening work. As a translator, Richard Friedman wisely avoids
any attempt to ‘strangify the text or resort to pompous or sententious
wording. Instead, this is the Torah straight-from-the-shoulder, spoken
in today’s English. Not everyone will agree with his choices or
explanations, but all readers will be happy for Friedman’s clear,
down-to-earth, and often thought-provoking rendering.”

—JAMES KUGEL,

Starr Professor of Hebrew Literature, Harvard University

“There is something new under the sun! Richard Friedman’s Commentary on
the Torah weds modern critical commentary with religious and traditional
sensibilities. It is must reading for all who regularly attend synagogue
or church, all who are in Bible study groups, and anyone with an
interest in religion. Delightful new insights abound.”

—PROFESSOR BURTON L. VISOTZKY,

Jewish Theological Seminary, author of Reading the Book: Making the
Bible a Timeless Text

“Friedman’s new Commentary on the Torah is fresh, timely, and
significant. It is especially valuable for offering a new sensitive
translation, and for bringing insights from traditional Jewish sources
into a creative dialogue with contemporary, critical concerns.”

—DR. TAMARA COHN ESKENAZI,

Professor of Bible, Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion

“A fresh, crisp, brilliant rendering of the Pentateuch, with rich
allusions to the Prophets and the Holy Writings. The commentary, while
flowing from traditional sources, reflects modern and contemporary
scholarship of very high quality beautifully integrated into a rich
mosaic.”

—ALFRED GOTTSCHALK,

Professor Emeritus, Jewish Intellectual History, Hebrew Union
College-Jewish Institute of Religion

“Friedman’s commentary, which evinces his familiarity with medieval
commentators and modern scholarship, and which is laced throughout with
his own unique insights and interpretations, is combined with a lucid
translation, written with literary sensitivity.”

—PROFESSOR SHALOM PAUL,

Hebrew University of Jerusalem

“It is a new kind of commentary. Clear. Vivid. Innovative. I shall be
adding it to my shelf regularly to savor its scholarly innovations,
accessible style, and lively, personal associations.”

—JACOB MILGROM,

Professor Emeritus, University of California, Berkeley, in Moment
Magazine

“[A] masterful commentary that truly teaches how the Torah text might be
read as a whole, and how it might ‘teach’ and inform the life of the
religiously sensitive individual. His pedagogical skills—his ability to
communicate in a clear and interesting fashion—are especially laudable.
I know of no other work that has these merits, and I imagine that anyone
from any background who reads this commentary will gain an enriched
sense of the Torah, its meaning, and its significance.”

—MARC BRETTLER,

Professor of Bible, Brandeis University, Bible Review

“Commentary on the Torah displays not only a scholar’s mastery of
biblical Hebrew but also a poet’s ear for language.”

—JONATHAN KIRSCH,

Los Angeles Times

“First-rate.... The rich library of Bible translations and commentary
gets even richer with the arrival of the Friedman version.”

—ELLIOT JAGER,

Jerusalem Post

“Jewish scholars have praised this modern, one-person treatise as ‘the
definitive Jewish commentary on the Five Books of Moses’ and have called
the new English translation ‘a successful balance between the literal
and the idiomatic.’”

—The Houston Chronicle

“[M]onumental. Friedman’s translation is fresh and dynamic.”

—The Bible Today

“… Reflects modern research and scholarship as well as traditional
sensibility. Friedman’s own translation and his commentary … has won
praise across theological lines.”

—Publisher’s Weekly, October 15, 2001

“Richard Elliott Friedman’s new translation and commentary on the Torah
provides profound routes of return for scholars and laypersons, Jew and
Christians alike. [T]his voice of Friedman’s, while clearly the voice of
an academic scholar, speaks as if directly to our contemporary American
English-speaking heart.”

-PETER OCHS,

Books & Culture

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I am fortunate. I owe thanks to

My father, Alex Sandor Friedman, and my mother, Reva Axelrod Friedman,
who first taught me the Torah, by word and example.

My rabbi, Mayer Abramowitz, who sat with me, teaching me the Torah with
commentaries, every Sabbath afternoon, year after year, as I grew up.
His skill as a teacher, his feeling for the text, and his generosity
with his time and attention were an unrepayable gift. When I was still a
young boy, I told him that I wanted to write a commentary on the To-rah
when I grew up. Here it is. I hope that he will be pleased with what he
has produced.

Professor Yohanan Muffs, my extraordinary teacher at the Jewish
Theological Seminary, who brought me back to understand as an adult the
greatness of the Tanak that I had felt as a child.

Professor G. Ernest Wright and especially Professor Frank Moore Cross,
my incomparable teachers at Harvard, who showed me that the Hebrew Bible
was both the treasure of the Jews and a source of blessing to all the
families of the earth.

Professor David Noel Freedman, my senior colleague, friend, and teacher,
who read every word of the commentary and translation and, with his
well-known generosity, criticized and enriched it, from the tiniest
point of punctuation to the largest concept. His esed is present
between the lines of every page of this book.

Professor William Henry Propp, my colleague, the world’s most learned
person on the book of Exodus, who read my own commentary on and
translation of Exodus, and saved me from a number of errors, improved
the work in many ways, and encouraged me.

Professor David Goodblatt and Professor Thomas Levy, my colleagues who
come from other, related fields of expertise, but who contribute with a
gracious spirit to those of us with whom they work.

My friend Irv Kass and my student Miriam Sherman, who also read and
improved the work.

The superb community of biblical scholars in Jerusalem, where I spent a
year working on the commentary. I was shown particular hospitality,
kindness, and ex-change of learning by Shalom Paul, Menahem Haran, Moshe
Weinfeld, Avi Hurvitz, Israel Knohl, Alex Rofé, Immanuel Tov, Edward
Greenstein, and especially Moshe Green-berg.

Elaine Markson, my literary agent who does not just sell books and
represent authors, but who loves books and is beloved by the authors she
represents.

Randy Linda Sturman, my wife, my partner, my basherta.

RICHARD ELLIOTT FRIEDMAN

I have come to realize that a book should list and acknowledge the
persons at the publishing house and its associates who produce the work.
This book had the fortune to be placed in the hands of persons at
HarperSanFrancisco, a division of HarperCollins, who have a combination
of professionalism and personal, human qualities that make the
inevitably complex process of publication a positive one. Stephen
Hanselman, the President of Harper-SanFrancisco, gave this book his
personal attention. And it benefited from the skills of Mark Chimsky,
Douglas Abrams, Terri Leonard, Renee Sedliar, Roger Freet, John
Kohlenberger, Ann Moru, and June Gunden.

Also by Richard Elliot Friedman…

[image]

Learn More

NOTES ON THE TRANSLATION

Translation is an art, not a science. There have been long and tedious
debates over whether a translation should be as literal as possible or
should use the idioms of the language into which the text is translated.
That debate has little to do with the reality of translation. There is
no single rule. Some passages are clearest when translated literally.
Some passages cannot possibly be translated literally without becoming
misleading and sounding absurd. It is the art, the skill, and the
sensitivity of the individual translator that make the difference. He or
she must make the individual decision on each and every passage: how to
capture it, how to con-vey what it means to someone who cannot read it
in the original. Translation of the Bible is a string of decisions. The
translator is always searching for the balance between literal and
idiomatic. To get that balance exactly right is impossible. The closest
any translation has come to it in English is the King James Version. All
English translations since then have been steps in re-fining that
balance, with varying degrees of success.

The translation here is my attempt at finding it. The following are some
notes on a few basic points of this translation.

1. Mixing old and new English: Many translators eliminate old English
terms—the whithers and thithers, whences and thences and hences, thees
and thys and thous—to produce a contemporary translation; yet they still
retain some archaic terms that do not have ready counterparts in
contemporary English, such as “lest” and “in the midst.” The result is
unfortunately an English that no English speaker ever wrote or spoke.
And so it just does not feel right. I have tried to produce a
translation that is consistent in the English it employs. Sometimes
there is simply no way to convey a Hebrew phrase’s meaning in
contemporary English, but I have tried for this consistency to the
extent that it is possible while being true to the original.

2. Contractions: English translators rarely use contractions, even when
translating discussions in common speech. But in normal spoken English,
one almost never speaks for as much as five minutes without using a
contraction. The result is that practically every conversation in the
Bible sounds artificial in translation. I do not use contractions when
translating narration; but, when translating conversations, I have used
contractions where they would normally be used in English conversation.

3. Possessive case: English translators have tended to avoid the
possessive case. They would rather say “the house of Moses” than “Moses’
house”—even though the latter is the way people express this type of
phrase ninety-nine out of a hundred times in English. The translators do
this with a good intention: they are trying to capture the Hebrew, which
uses a construct form to express such things. But this requires adding a
word (“of”), which does not appear in the Hebrew, and it often makes an
unnatural English. I freely use the possessive case. This is not an
absolute rule. I still use the “of” form if it makes better sense, as,
for example, in the case of a well-known phrase like “the children of
Israel.”

4. Starting verses with the word “and”: The Hebrew conjunction begins
almost every verse. It usually means “and,” but it has a wider range of
meanings as well, so translators make it “but,” “since,” “while,”
“then,” and more. I usually leave it as “and” in English, but I do use
the other terms in cases in which the context directs us to take it
differently. Further, some recent translators simply leave it out
altogether; so, unlike the KJV, RSV, and JPS, each sentence in these
translations does not begin with the word “and.” On this point, too, I
prefer to preserve the feel of the original. I retain the word “and”
where it occurs in the Hebrew.

5. Hebrew idioms: Sometimes I keep an idiom rather than translate it
away—so long as its meaning is clear—because then my translation makes
known to the reader of the translation how the Hebrew works. For
example, in Gen 16:2 I translate the Hebrew quite literally as: And
Abraham “listened to Sarah’s voice,” which is unusual and even a bit
redundant in English, but I would rather have the reader of the
translation see how this is expressed in the Bible than modify it to
something like “listened to Sarah.” Similarly in Gen 19:8 and many other
places, I translate the expression “good in your eyes” literally because
it is understandable in English even if it is not the common idiom.

6. Paragraphs: Separating a text into paragraphs is a basic part of
writing and reading in English. It is now impossible to know for certain
where the paragraphs began in the original text of the Torah. Some
translations do not separate paragraphs at all. I have made decisions on
where to begin new paragraphs based on the content, logic, and emphases
of the stories. My divisions between sections likewise are based on
these factors. They do not necessarily correspond to the points at which
chapter breaks come in the text.

7. The name of God: I write it the same as it appears in the original,
with the four consonants showing, thus: YHWH. This is known as the
Tetragrammaton. In biblical times people would have read the name aloud.
In the period following the completion of the Hebrew Bible, Jews began
the practice of not saying the divine name out loud. Christians followed
this practice as well. The practice for centuries was to say “the LORD”
(Hebrew ’dny) whenever one came to this word rather
than to say what the four Hebrew letters actually spelled. Currently,
some people have returned to the practice of saying the name out loud.
Readers should follow the same practice in reading this translation that
they would follow when reading the original. If they do not pronounce
the divine name aloud, then they should say “the LORD” whenever they see
the four letters.

8. The gender of God: Even though, like most people, I do not conceive
of a deity who is male or female, there is no way around the fact that
the Torah does in fact present God in consistently masculine terms. Even
the name of God is masculine. (The feminine would be THWH.) I have
therefore conveyed the masculine Hebrew conception in the translation as
well. My point is that in each case I am translating an original work
that someone else wrote, and I do not seek to impose my theological
conceptions on that person’s work, nor do I want to hide that person’s
views by means of a translator’s power.

9. The infinitive of emphasis: Hebrew sometimes has the infinitive of a
verb placed before the verb itself in order to convey emphasis. Thus the
Hebrew môt yûmt would mean literally: “dying he shall be put to
death.” Most English translators use some formulation such as “he shall
surely be put to death” or “he shall be put to death, yes, death” to
convey it. Since the function of this infinitival formulation in Hebrew
is to emphasize, I think that it is best translated by the usual
mechanisms of emphasis in English. The usual ways to convey emphasis in
English are the use of either italics or exclamation points. I therefore
generally use italics to con-vey Hebrew infinitival emphatics.
Occasionally I use an exclamation point to convey this emphasis. In a
few cases in which neither of these English conventions properly conveys
the He-brew meaning, I leave the infinitive untranslated.

10. Cognate accusatives: Cognate accusatives (for example, “I dreamed a
dream,” “I did a deed”) are fairly common and a hallmark of literary
style in Biblical Hebrew. Cognate accusatives are not incorrect
grammatically in English but are sufficiently rare as to be felt by
English readers to be uncomfortable. And so, like nearly all
translators, I convey cognate accusatives without repeating the cognate
forms. Thus, for example, I translate hlôm hlamtî as “I
had a dream” rather than the literal “I dreamed a dream.”

11. Cohortatives: Like nearly all translators, I convey the cohortative
as “let me” or “let us” or “may I” or “may we.” Unfortunately, these
English forms suggest permission, as if the person using the cohortative
is asking to be allowed to do something. The reader should note that the
Hebrew does not usually have such a connotation. It merely expresses the
person’s wish or intent, without necessarily implying that action or
permission by anyone else is necessary.

12. Jussives: The same applies to the jussive, which I convey as “let
it” or “let him” or “let them” or “let there be” or “may he” or “may
they.”

13. A redundant formulation: The formulation “And he said, saying …”
occurs fairly often in the Hebrew text. Although it feels redundant and
awkward in English, I still prefer to retain the extra word—“saying”—to
reflect the original.

14. Etymologies of names: Often a story is told that explains the origin
of a name of a person or place. For example, the name Isaac, Hebrew
yiq, means “he laughs” or “let him laugh,” and it
is derived in this story from the fact that Sarah laughs at the idea
that she could give birth to a son in her old age (Gen 18:12–15). It is
difficult to convey this in an English translation without adding a
bracketed or footnoted comment. Similarly with the names Noah, Babel,
Jacob, Moses, and so on, it is usually impossible to convey such Hebrew
etymological material in translation. A note or bracketed insertion
interrupts the story for the reader, and I did not want to do that. So,
as most translators have done in the past, I have left the text itself
alone, accepting the fact that this is one of the inherent limitations
of translation, and I have explained some of the etymologies in the
comments.

15. Words with multiple translations: Hebrew terms sometimes have a
wider range of meaning than any single English counterpart. Hebrew
‘bdîm, for example, can be “slave” or “servant” and
therefore must be translated by different English words in different
contexts. Hebrew ‘yp can be “tired,” “exhausted,” “faint,”
or “famished.” Hebrew gdl can be “big,” “great,” “high,”
or “old.” Hebrew terms for groups of animals—flock, herd, sheep, oxen,
cows, animals, domestic animals, wild animals—do not correspond exactly
to English terms, and it is virtually impossible to translate each term
consistently through the Tanak. Translators must make decisions in
translating such terms individually in their contexts.

16. The text: The translation follows the Hebrew text that is beside it.
That is, it is a translation of the Masoretic Text. I raise notable
cases of differences in the Septuagint, Dead Sea Scrolls, and other
versions in the comments below the text.

OTHER WORKS

Also by Richard Elliott Friedman

The Exile and Biblical Narrative

The Creation of Sacred Literature, Editor

The Poet and the Historian, Editor

The Future of Biblical Studies: The Hebrew Scriptures, Co-editor

Who Wrote the Bible?

The Hidden Face of God (originally published as The Disappearance of
God)

The Hidden Book in the Bible

COPYRIGHT

The Scripture text in Hebrew is taken from the Biblia Hebraica
Stuttgartensia Copyright © 1967/77, 1983 Deutsche Biblegesellscaft,
German Bible Society, Stuttgart. Used by permission.

COMMENTARY ON THE TORAH. Copyright © 2001 by Richard Elliott Friedman.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this
e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books.

HarperCollins Web site: http://www.harpercollins.com

HarperCollins™, h, and HarperOne® are trademarks of HarperCollins
Publishers.

FIRST HARPERCOLLINS PAPERBACK EDITION PUBLISHED IN 2003

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Friedman, Richard
Elliott.

Commentary on the Torah : Richard Elliott Friedman

    p.    cm.

ISBN 978–0-06–050717-6

EPub Edition © AUGUST 2012 ISBN: 9780062240934

    1. Bible. O.T. Pentateuch—Commentaries. I. Bible. O.T. Pentateuch.
English.

Friedman. 2001. II. Title.

BS1225.3 .F7495 2001

222’.1077—dc21

00–031979

08 09 10 11 12 RRD(H) 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ABOUT THE PUBLISHER

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.

Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street

Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia

www.harpercollins.com.au

Canada

HarperCollins Canada

2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor

Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada

www.harpercollins.ca

New Zealand

HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand

Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive

Rosedale 0632

Auckland, New Zealand

www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

1 London Bridge Street

London SE1 9GF, UK

www.harpercollins.co.uk

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

195 Broadway

New York, NY 10007

www.harpercollins.com
