------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2

¹ And a man from the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And the woman became pregnant and gave birth to a son. And she saw him,
that he was good, and she concealed him for three months.

---

Footnote 2:2. gave birth to a son. Moses is profoundly a lone figure. Although he
has a family, Exodus is not about family relations and does not develop
them in Moses’ case. Coming on the heels of Genesis, with its long
stories of families, this is striking. We learn little of Moses’ mother
and less of his father. The most central family relationship is between
Moses and his brother Aaron, yet it plays no role in the story. Aaron
need not be Moses’ brother for the sake of the development of the story;
their interactions usually do not depend on it at all. And Miriam, when
she is first identified by name, is identified as “the sister of Aaron,”
rather than of Moses (15:20), and she and Moses are never pictured
exchanging any words. Family members play a part in the birth story of
Moses, but the account establishes, after all, not a relationship but
the distance between Moses and his family; it is about his being raised
by others, from another people. Moses has a family of which he is
husband and father, but this just further demonstrates the point,
because the text merely reports that he has a wife and sons. They play
no role. There is no story about them except the strange story of
Zipporah’s circumcising their son, and it is only three verses long
(4:24–26), and it is incomprehensible. (See the comment on 4:24.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And she was not able to conceal him anymore, and she took an ark made
of bulrushes for him and smeared it with bitumen and with pitch and put
the boy in it and put it in the reeds by the bank of the Nile.

---

Footnote 2:3. the Nile. The same river that means death for all the other male
newborns means life for Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And his sister stood still at a distance to know what would be done to
him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And the Pharaoh’s daughter went down to bathe at the Nile, and her
girls were going alongside the Nile, and she saw the ark among the reeds
and sent her maid, and she took it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And she opened it and saw him, the child: and here was a boy crying,
and she had compassion on him, and she said, “This is one of the
Hebrews’ children.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Shall I go and call a
nursing woman from the Hebrews for you, and she’ll nurse the child for
you?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go.” And the girl went and called
the child’s mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child and nurse him for
me, and I’ll give your pay.” And the woman took the boy and nursed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And the boy grew older, and she brought him to Pharaoh’ daughter, and
he became her son. And she called his name Moses, and she said, “Because
I drew him from the water.”

---

Footnote 2:10. Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. The story is
intriguingly similar to the legend of the Mesopotamian king Sargon,
found in Assyrian and Babylonian texts, in which a priestess places her
infant son in a basket of rushes with pitch on its exterior and casts
him into the river, and a water-drawer retrieves the baby and rears him
as his son. This and other literary parallels to the birth account of
Moses suggest how enigmatic the biblical story is. Freud observed that
such stories generally involve three steps: (1) a child is born of noble
or royal lineage, (2) the child comes to be brought up as a commoner,
and (3) the child grows up and eventually arrives back at his rightful
place in a royal house. Freud noted that such stories were conceived
etiologically, composed as justifications of cases in which commoners
rose to thrones. The historical truth in such cases lay in the second
step: the king really came from commoner roots. The story was composed
to legitimize his kingship, as an answer to those who would deny his
royal blood. Freud considered the birth story of Moses against this
background and suggested the possibility that here, too, the truth
behind the etiology lay in the second step, that Moses was an Egyptian,
and that the birth story was composed to explain how an Egyptian had
come to be the leader of the Israelites. Freud’s interest (on this
particular point of his larger study) was primarily historical, and his
hypothesis has never been proved or disproved; but it is also important
because it indicates what the Torah and its audience valued. In the
Israelite story, the values are reversed. The royal house is step two,
the aberration, rather than the prized position. Moses’ royal placement
simply is not what is important. There is no information about his early
life in the Egyptian court. We are informed that he is nursed by his own
mother, but we are not certain what this report is supposed to
establish. We cannot even be certain that it means that Moses thus knows
that he is Israelite. Later the text says that he “went out to his
brothers and saw their burdens” (2:11), but this wording, too, is not
definitive as to whether he knows that the Israelites are his kin. There
is even ambiguity in his killing of an Egyptian taskmaster whom he sees
striking a slave: is it because of his bond with the Israelites or his
sense of justice? In a curious parallel to the deity Himself, Moses’
background and motives are mysterious.

Footnote 2:10. she called his name Moses. Even learned people often recall this
story out of order, imagining the Pharaoh’s daughter naming Moses as she
draws him from the water, but she does not in fact name him until after
he has grown and his mother brings him to her. What was he called until
that time? Classical and recent commentators have not addressed this.
Since the text does not tell us, we must assume that the concern is to
explain the origin of the name Moses and that there is no interest in
pursuing whether there was any prior name given by his parents.
Presumably the only name known in tradition and history was Moses, and
so the author was not free to make up any other. And the story had to
ascribe the naming to the Pharaoh’s daughter because she was the one in
power, the one who would present him to the Egyptian society, and so on.
Still, we can hardly resist wondering why the parents would not be
pictured as giving their son a name. If he is with them until he is
weaned, that may be several years, and we can hardly resist imagining
what the parents would call him. I imagine—this is my midrash—that they
do not give him a name. They call him “the child” (Hebrew hayyeled).
When they talk to him they call him “my child” (yaldî). And this gives
those years a mysterious, portentous quality. They know that his naming
simply is not in their power. And so his fate is not in their hands
either. Count how many times you call your child by his or her name in a
day, and you will know how many times these parents are reminded of
their unique situation: thankful that their son alone is spared from
death but sad and frightened that he will be raised by others, from the
very household that is their enemy, and worried that he will not know
who his real people and family are. From the perspective of Jewish
history, this is not a singular experience. In the twentieth century
Jewish parents in Europe gave their children to non-Jewish families to
save them during the holocaust.

Footnote 2:10. Because I drew him. The naming of Moses argues both for and
against the story’s historicity. On one hand, there is the unlikelihood
of the idea that the princess would know Hebrew, let alone choose to
derive the baby’s name from a Hebrew etymology. And in fact the name
Moses is not Hebrew. It is Egyptian, meaning “is born,” as in the name
Ramesses, meaning “Ra (the sun god) bore him.” On the other hand, the
fact that the great leader of the Israelites has an Egyptian name (as do
other early priests: Phinehas, Hophni) is evidence that Israelites did
indeed live for some time in Egypt. Names are valuable evidence in
tracing a community’s origins and history. One might suggest that the
Egyptian name Moses was just made up to make the story sound authentic.
But we can be fairly certain that the Israelites did not make it up,
precisely because they told the story about the princess calling him
Moses “because I drew him”—which shows that the Israelites were not
conscious of the name’s Egyptian meaning!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And it was in those days, and Moses grew older, and he went out to his
brothers and saw their burdens, and he saw an Egyptian man striking a
Hebrew man, one of his brothers.

---

Footnote 2:11. Moses. Although Exodus is ultimately about God, Israel, and Egypt,
the narrative attention is focused on Moses from its second chapter to
the end. Thus, although Exodus is about nations and extraordinary divine
interventions into the course of human affairs, it directs its readers
to this dynamic through the lens of an individual man. Notably, even
though Exodus is not about individuals in the way that Genesis is, it
introduces a figure in whom character development reaches a new level,
equaled by no other figure in the Hebrew Bible except possibly David.
Moses is pictured at various stages in his life, expressing a variety of
moods and emotions, changing, especially in the way in which he relates
and speaks to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And he turned this way and that way and saw that there was no man, and
he struck the Egyptian and hid him in the sand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And he went out on the second day, and here were two Hebrew men
fighting. And he said to the one who was in the wrong, “Why do you
strike your companion?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And he said, “Who made you a commander and judge over us? Are you
saying you’d kill me—the way you killed the Egyptian?!”

And Moses was afraid and said, “The thing is known for sure.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And Pharaoh heard this thing and sought to kill Moses, and Moses fled
from Pharaoh’s presence and lived in the land of Midian.

And he sat by a well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And a priest of Midian had seven daughters, and they came and drew
water and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ and the shepherds came and drove them away. And Moses got up and saved
them and watered their flock.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And they came to Reuel, their father, and he said, “Why were you so
quick to come today?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And they said, “An Egyptian man rescued us from the shepherds’ hand,
and he drew water for us and watered the flock, too.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And he said to his daughters, “And where is he? Why is this that
you’ve left the man? Call him, and let him eat bread.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And Moses was content to live with the man. And he gave Zipporah, his
daughter, to Moses,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² and she gave birth to a son, and he called his name Gershom,
“because,” he said, “I was an alien in a foreign land.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And it was after those many days, and the king of Egypt died.

And the children of Israel groaned from the work, and they cried out,
and their wail went up to God from the work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And God heard their moaning, and God remembered His covenant with
Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

2:23–24. groan, cry, wail, moan. Four different words are used in the
Hebrew to describe their crying. This conveys that their agony is
intense, continuous, and pervasive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 2:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And God saw the children of Israel. And God knew!
