------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

4

¹ And Moses answered, and he said, “And here, they won’t believe me and
won’t listen to my voice, because they’ll say, ‘YHWH hasn’t appeared to
you!’”

---

Footnote 4:1. they won’t listen to my voice. Moses’ third response is surprising
because he appears to doubt, even to contradict, what God has already
told him explicitly. YHWH instructs him to gather the elders of Israel
and tell them that their ancestors’ God has appeared to him and is going
to take them out of Egypt, and YHWH informs him directly that “They’ll
listen to your voice” (3:18). God then goes on for five verses with
details of what Moses should say to the king of Egypt, what the king’s
response will be, what YHWH will do in return, and how Israel will leave
and despoil Egypt. But Moses, appearing to have missed the content of
these last five verses, questions the earlier point, the last point that
directly referred to him himself. He says, “And here, they won’t believe
me and won’t listen to my voice” (4:1). This can also be understood to
mean “And what if they will not believe me and will not listen to my
voice.” Even on this understanding, it is remarkable. Either way, it is
depicting Moses as questioning what God has just told him. When God
Himself tells a human, “They’ll listen to you,” we do not normally
expect the human to say, “But what if they don’t?” Again YHWH does not
answer the question but instead responds directly to the problem at
hand. That is, instead of telling Moses what to do if they do not
listen, God gives Moses three miraculous signs, which will guarantee
that they will listen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And YHWH said to him, “What’s this in your hand?”

And he said, “A staff.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And He said, “Throw it to the ground.”

And he threw it to the ground. And it became a snake! And Moses fled
from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And YHWH said to Moses, “Put out your hand and take hold of its tail.”

And he put out his hand and held onto it, and it became a staff in his
hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵“So that they will believe that YHWH, their fathers’ God, Abraham’s
God, Isaac’s God, and Jacob’s God, has appeared to you!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And YHWH said to him further, “Bring your hand into your bosom.”

And he brought his hand into his bosom. And he brought it out; and,
here, his hand was leprous like snow!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And He said, “Put your hand back to your bosom.”

And he put his hand back to his bosom. And he brought it out from his
bosom; and, here, it had gone back like its flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸“And it will be, if they won’t believe you and won’t listen to the
voice of the first sign, then they’ll believe the voice of the latter
one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And it will be, if they also won’t believe in these two signs and won’t
listen to your voice, then you’ll take some of the water of the Nile and
spill it on the dry ground. And it will be water that you’ll take from
the Nile, and it will become blood on the dry ground.”

---

Footnote 4:9. two signs. The two signs are that the staff becomes a snake and his
hand becomes leprous as snow. Why these two things? They foreshadow
coming events: the snake on a pole (Num 21:5–9) and Miriam’s being
leprous as snow (Num 12:10).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And Moses said to YHWH, “Please, my Lord, I’m not a man of words.
Neither yesterday nor the day before—nor since you spoke to your
servant! Because I’m heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue.”

---

Footnote 4:10. I’m not a man of words. These words, Moses’ fourth response, will
reverberate at the beginning of Moses’ last speech. (See the comment on
Deut 1:1.)

Footnote 4:10. heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue. This is frequently taken to
mean some sort of speech defect. It is frequently translated as “slow of
speech”; and a famous midrash goes so far as to recount the origin of
Moses’ speech impediment in a story that pictures him burning his tongue
in his infancy in the Egyptian palace. More cautiously, we are best
advised to seek the meaning of a biblical idiom by, first of all,
observing where else it occurs in Scripture. “Heavy of tongue” occurs in
one other place, Ezek 3:5–7. There YHWH tells Ezekiel that he is not
being sent to peoples who are “deep of lip and heavy of tongue,” whose
words Ezekiel cannot understand. YHWH says, ironically, that such
peoples would listen, but the house of Israel will not listen! In that
context, “heavy of tongue” refers to nations who speak foreign
languages. It has therefore been suggested that Moses’ protest here in
Exodus is that he does not speak Egyptian. This is difficult to defend,
though, given the explicit report in Exodus 2 that Moses has been raised
in the Egyptian court. Still, the meaning of “heavy of tongue” as
referring to speaking a foreign language fits our context in Exodus 4, I
believe, because YHWH has told Moses to gather and speak to the elders
of Israel. Moses’ protest may perhaps be best understood, then, as being
on the grounds that he does not yet speak Hebrew! God’s response in fact
confirms that the problem for Moses is speaking “to the people,” not to
the Egyptians (4:16). And the final confirmation is that in the first
meeting with the people’s elders “Aaron spoke all the words that YHWH
had spoken to Moses” (4:30); but in the first meeting with Pharaoh, both
Moses and Aaron speak (5:1,3).

Footnote 4:10. nor since you spoke to your servant. Another understanding of “I’m
not a man of words” and “heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue” is that
Moses is saying that he is not eloquent. And this is a wonderful irony,
because his humble wording here is in fact an eloquent formulation
(“Neither yesterday nor the day before—nor since you spoke to your
servant!”). Moses, as it were, undermines his own denial.

Whether “heavy of mouth and heavy of tongue” means a speech defect, a
foreign language, or a lack of eloquence, a question remains: why choose
a man who has a speaking problem for a task that requires speaking?! The
lesson may be (as with Jacob) that God can work through anyone. Or it
may be that it takes divine insight to comprehend what would make
someone the best person for a task. Perhaps it is precisely Moses’
heaviness of mouth that makes his acts most impressive in Egypt, rather
than their being performed by a person who heralds each of the
miraculous plagues with a grand speech. And perhaps such a greater
speaker would shift the focus too much from God to the human himself.
Also, one can learn from the divine choice that one should not judge a
person’s ability to do a task too hastily or by the most obvious
characteristics. Even an individual who has a disadvantage may be the
best suited to be successful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And YHWH said to him, “Who set a mouth for humans? Or who will set a
mute or deaf or seeing or blind? Is it not I, YHWH?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And now go, and I’ll be with your mouth, and I’ll instruct you what
you shall speak.”

---

Footnote 4:12. I’ll be. Hebrew ’HYH. Note the significance of the first
recurrence of the word here. It also came in 3:12, before the revelation
of the divine name. It will come again in 4:15. So the answer to Moses’
first, second, third, and fourth responses is, in essence, the same:
’HYH. I Am. I’ll Be with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And he said, “Please, my Lord, send by the hand you’ll send.”

---

Footnote 4:13. send by the hand you’ll send. There are two opposite meanings that
this strange clause may have. It may mean: send whoever—which is to say,
anyone but me. Or it may mean that Moses now acquiesces to the divine
will, in the sense of “Very well, then, send the one you want.” The fact
that God is angry at Moses in the next verse fits more naturally with
the former meaning. In either case, the one common element of the two
meanings is: they both denote that Moses is out of excuses. God has
nullified each of his four attempts to avoid this task. He can only
acquiesce or beg off. He cannot raise problems or objections. This is
also further evidence that fear of the task is what has motivated Moses
all along. He is forced now to the essential point. It is not “Who am I”
or “What shall I tell them?” or “They won’t believe me.” It is Moses’
reluctance about the hand whom God has chosen to send.

Through all five responses, Moses’ reluctance stands out and perhaps
comes as a surprise to many who find it difficult to imagine someone’s
receiving a prophetic commission directly from God and trying to avoid
it. Yet this image of the reluctant prophet recurs in several other
places in the Bible (Elijah, Jonah, Jeremiah). It does not appear to me
to be simply a recurring literary motif in the way that some understand,
for example, the “wise courtier” theme. It seems rather to reflect a
shared conviction, by a number of the biblical authors, that it is not
necessarily an honor or a joy to be a prophet. It is a burden, almost
beyond human endurance. Here, in the book that introduces the role of
the prophet as the individual who brings a revelation to a community, we
learn from the beginning that this is not attractive. To hear the voice
of God is frightening. To experience the divine power is terrifying. To
deliver a divine message to the community is thankless, frustrating, and
occasionally even dangerous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And YHWH’s anger flared at Moses, and He said, “Isn’t Aaron your
Levite brother? I knew that he will speak! And also here he is, coming
out toward you! And he’ll see you and be happy in his heart.

---

Footnote 4:14. your Levite brother. This means a fellow Levite. The text does not
yet identify Aaron as Moses’ actual brother. That is not stated
explicitly until Exod 6:20. After that, Aaron is referred to as “your
brother” (7:1,2) and never again as “your Levite brother.”

Footnote 4:14. I knew that he will speak! This has usually been taken to mean
only that God is aware that Aaron is a capable speaker. But the tenses
and context possibly indicate that it is much stronger: that God is
informing Moses that He knew all along that Aaron would have to do the
talking for Moses. This would only be a case of divine foreknowledge
(knowing something in advance), not of God preordaining or manipulating
human affairs. This in turn opens the question of why God would be angry
at Moses’ protest. The ambiguity here is tied to the complexity of
Hebrew verb tenses (which are not simply past, present, and future, as
they are often taught), and so the meaning of this verse remains
uncertain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And you’ll speak to him and set the words in his mouth, and I, I shall
be with your mouth and with his mouth, and I shall instruct you what you
shall do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And he will speak for you to the people. And it will be: he will
become a mouth for you, and you will become a god for him!

---

Footnote 4:16. you will become a god for him. No matter how figuratively we take
this image, it is extraordinary. To speak of a human, Moses, in terms of
the divine is awesome, and it will recur later when God tells Moses,
“I’ve made you a god to Pharaoh!” (7:1). The idea that Moses will in any
way be godlike in other humans’ perceptions sets up a theme that will
continue after the exodus: Moses must repeatedly insist to the people
that their complaints are against God and not against him. This in turn
recalls Joseph’s insistence to the wine steward, the baker, and Pharaoh
that “Not I. God will answer . . . ” (Gen 41:16).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And you shall take this staff in your hand, by which you’ll do the
signs.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And Moses went.

And he went back to Jether, his father-in-law, and said to him, “Let me
go so I may go back to my brothers who are in Egypt and see if they’re
still living.”

And Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.”

---

Footnote 4:18. Jether. His name is Jethro. The change to yeter here may be part
of a wordplay to come later (10:5; see the comment there).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And YHWH said to Moses in Midian, “Go. Go back to Egypt, because all
the people who sought your life have died.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And Moses took his wife and his sons and rode them on an ass, and he
went back to the land of Egypt. And Moses took the staff of God in his
hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And YHWH said to Moses, “When you’re going to go back to Egypt, see
all the wonders that I’ve set in your hand, and you shall do them in
front of Pharaoh. And I: I’ll strengthen his heart, and he won’t let the
people go.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And you shall say to Pharaoh, ‘YHWH said this: My child, my firstborn,
is Israel.

---

Footnote 4:22. My child, my firstborn, is Israel. God tells Moses to say this to
Pharaoh, but Moses is never reported as saying it. He also is never
reported as saying the rest of this message: “Should you refuse to let
it go, here: I’m killing your child, your firstborn!” Why does he not
say this to Pharaoh? It is apparently because his first words to Pharaoh
do not work. Moses begins by speaking strongly to Pharaoh: “YHWH said,
‘Let my people go.’” But Pharaoh, unmoved, replies, “I don’t know YHWH,
and I won’t let Israel go.” Moses then changes his approach
dramatically. He starts over and this time does not use the commanding
wording (the imperative), but rather the polite particle of request
(Hebrew n’) and the gentler form: “please that we might go” (the
cohortative). Moses has backed off somewhat and taken a more
conciliatory approach rather than taking the even tougher approach of
threatening Pharaoh with the death of his own son. This conciliatory
wording is given to Moses at the burning bush as well (3:18), so it
appears that God is giving Moses both the tough and the gentle options.
In any negotiation—in law, business, or any human relationship,
including marriage—one must use wisdom to know when to exercise each
approach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And I’ve said to you: Let my child go and serve me. And should you
refuse to let it go, here: I’m killing your child, your firstborn!’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And he was on the way, at a lodging place, and YHWH met him, and he
asked to kill him.

---

Footnote 4:24. he asked to kill him. No one knows what the episode at the lodging
place means. The explanation that accounts for more of the connections
than any other is that of my colleague William Propp: The reason that
God seeks to put Moses to death is because Moses still bears the
bloodguilt for having killed an Egyptian. The blood of the circumcision
serves to expiate the guilt, making it possible for Moses to live and
return to Egypt. The word for “blood” in this story is the plural
dmîm, which is usually associated with bloodguilt. The word for
“bridegroom” also means “circumcision” in Arabic (and in some cultures
circumcision is performed just before marriage). Propp suggests that the
original bridegroom/circumcision connection had been lost by the time
this story was composed, and so it was created to explain an old
expression: tan dmîm, “bridegroom of blood.” Also,
this use of blood to avert death is a foreshadowing of the tenth plague
in Egypt.

Still, like all explanations I have seen, this leaves the question of
why God would choose Moses, make a miraculous appearance to him, insist
on his going to Egypt despite his five attempts to avoid it, and then
seek to kill him. I therefore understand the confused use of the pronoun
“he” in this story in a different way. All commentators recognize that
it is unclear when it refers to God, to Moses, or to Moses’ son. But
they all take the first “he” to refer to God: He (God) sought to kill
Moses. I am raising the possibility (reflected in my translation: “he
asked to kill him”) that it means that Moses is asking God to take his
life (rather than send him to Egypt). This is consistent with another
time in Moses’ life when he will ask God to kill him (Num 11:15, where
he says emphatically: “Kill me!”). And it fits with a model of prophets
who ask God to take their lives—Elijah (1 Kings 19:4) and Jonah (4:4)—or
say that they prefer death to being prophets—Jeremiah (20:14–18). (Note
that these are the same three prophets who, like Moses, are famous for
being reluctant; see the comment on 4:13.)

If Moses is seeking his own death here, then Zipporah’s action might be
understood as her passionate response to her husband’s wish to die: You
have a wife! You have a son, who should live to marry and be a part of
the covenant!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And Zipporah took a flint and cut her son’s foreskin and touched his
feet, and she said, “Because you’re a bridegroom of blood to me.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁶ And he held back from Him. Then she said, “A bridegroom of blood for
circumcisions.”

---

Footnote 4:26. And he held back from Him. Meaning that Moses stopped asking God
to kill him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:27

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁷ And YHWH said to Aaron, “Go toward Moses, to the wilderness.” And he
went, and he met him in the Mountain of God, and he kissed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:28

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁸ And Moses told Aaron all YHWH’s words that He had sent him and all the
signs that He had commanded him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:29

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁹ And Moses went, and Aaron, and they gathered all the elders of the
children of Israel,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:30

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁰ and Aaron spoke all the words that YHWH had spoken to Moses. And he
did the signs before the people’s eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 4:31

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³¹ And the people believed, and they heard that YHWH had taken account of
the children of Israel and that He had seen their degradation. And they
knelt and bowed.
