------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

20

¹ And God spoke all these words, saying:

---

Footnote 20:1. God spoke all these words. God speaks the words of the Ten
Commandments aloud directly to the people. The Ten Commandments are the
text of the covenant between God and Israel. One of the most fruitful
discoveries of biblical research was the independent recognition by
three scholars (E. Bickermann, G. Mendenhall, and K. Baltzer) in the
1950s that there is a formal similarity between the Israelite covenant
and international legal documents of the ancient Near Eastern countries.
The treaty documents, dictated by regional kings (suzerains) to the
local city kings (vassals) who were subject to them, formalized the
relationship between the two. They regularly included a specific group
of formal elements:

1.  The suzerain’s introduction of himself by name.
2.  An historical prologue, giving the history of the relations between
    the parties, generally showing what the suzerain had done for his
    vassal, and thus establishing that the vassal was in the suzerain’s
    debt.
3.  The prime stipulation of the treaty, namely that the vassal was to
    have allegiance to this suzerain and to no other.
4.  The rest of the stipulations, e.g., the vassal’s obligation to pay
    tribute, to come when summoned to the suzerain’s court, and to
    provide troops for the suzerain’s military defense.

The Sinai covenant here exhibits striking parallels to this legal
structure, containing the key elements:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 1. Introduction:                  | I am YHWH your God                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 2. Historical Prologue:           | who brought you out from the land |
|                                   | of Egypt, from a house of slaves  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 3. Prime Stipulation:             | You shall not have other gods     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| 4. Other Stipulations:            | You shall not make a statue       |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | You shall not bring up the name   |
|                                   | of YHWH, your God, for a          |
|                                   | falsehood                         |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Remember the Sabbath …            |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | Honor your father and your mother |
|                                   | …                                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The Near Eastern suzerainty treaties also include other features that
appear here in the covenant. They included an oath sworn by the vassal
pledging fidelity to the suzerain and to the requirements of the treaty,
and they included provision for the treaty document, requiring that it
be deposited in a sacred place. In Exodus the people pledge their
obedience (24:3,7), and the covenant text is deposited in the ark in the
Tabernacle (25:16,21; 40:20).

Thus Israel’s relations with its God are conceived in the legal terms of
that world. The words of the Ten Commandments and of the Covenant Code
are not only orders that must be obeyed. They are legal corpora,
concluded contractually between the creator and a human community.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² I am YHWH, your God, who brought you out from the land of Egypt, from a
house of slaves.

---

Footnote 20:2. I am YHWH, your God. People question whether this first verse of
the covenant is a commandment or a statement, and they argue over what,
exactly, it commands. The evidence from the ancient Near Eastern
documents makes clear that this is not to be counted as one of the
commandments. Introductory statements such as this one are common and
fundamental to these documents: stating the name of the one who is
dictating the terms and stating the history of what this one has done
for the recipient of these terms. They leave no doubt that the first
commandment is not “I am YHWH . . .” but rather “You shall have no other
gods….” This is confirmed by the fact that when one counts “I am
YHWH . . .” as a commandment, one comes out with eleven commandments.
Those who have thought this to be a commandment have had to combine two
of the later commandments into one.

In any case, the question of what the opening words command arises in
part because in English we call this text by the name “the Ten
Commandments.” That misleads us, though, because in the Torah itself
(Exod 34:28; Deut 10:4), this text is called simply the Ten Things (or
Ten Words, or Ten Statements; Hebrew ‘eret
haddbrîm).

Footnote 20:2. who brought you out from the land of Egypt. In the relationship
between the covenant and the ancient Near Eastern legal texts, the
historical prologue has special importance: In the Torah, law is set in
history. Law is never given in the Tanak in the abstract, apart from a
historical context. There is always an understanding that the
commandments are to be followed because God did something for the humans
who are being commanded. There are more than sixty chapters of Torah
before the first law to Israel occurs (Exodus 12). Indeed, as I said in
my first comment (Gen 1:1), Rashi began his commentary with the question
of why the Torah starts with creation and subsequent history rather than
being strictly a law code and starting with the first law in Exodus 12.
I would now add another answer: that biblical Israel understood this law
to require historical context. The law was conceived to have been born
at a turning point in history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ You shall not have other gods before my face.

---

Footnote 20:3. You shall not have other gods. Various groups have counted the Ten
Commandments differently because of the matter of the historical
prologue. Some identify the first commandment as “I am YHWH, your God,
who brought you out from the land of Egypt, from a house of slaves.”
Others list “You shall have no other gods before me” as the first
commandment. The evidence from the Near Eastern treaties indicates that
the latter way is correct. The first line is not a commandment. It is
the historical prologue. (See the comment on 20:2.)

Footnote 20:3. before my face. Hebrew ‘al pny has no good English
equivalent. The point is that everywhere is ‘al
pny, i.e., before God’s face, so the commandment
means that one simply cannot have any other gods. Monotheism has become
so successful in Western civilization and much of Eastern civilization
that it is difficult now for us to recapture the original force of this
commandment. The profound has become the norm, so people forget that it
is profound.

Some argue that the wording of the first commandment is not properly
monotheistic. They say the commandment “You shall not have other gods
before my face (or: in my presence, or: before me)” suggests a
recognition that other gods exist. They therefore argue that the
commandment only prohibits the worship of other deities but does not
deny their reality. This appears to be a too-careful reading of these
words. The fact is that it is difficult to word a command of monotheism
without referring to other deities. This is simply a fact of language.
(I frequently suggest to my students that they try to compose a number
of formulations of a command of monotheism, and we regularly find that a
substantial number of the possible formulations will contain reference
to other gods.) Those who hold the view that monotheism came late in
Israel cannot build a case on the wording of the first commandment. The
issue here is linguistic, not theological.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ You shall not make a statue or any form that is in the skies above or
that is in the earth below or that is in the water below the earth.

---

Footnote 20:4. statue. Pagan religion in the ancient Near East, as in Greece, was
not idol worship. The statues of the gods and goddesses were icons,
symbols that represented the deities’ presence. They provided a
direction for prayer, a feeling of awe, a sense of one’s god’s
closeness. But pagans did not believe that the statue was the god. The
god was a force, known through its particular power in the universe:
sky, earth, sun, wind, grain, fertility. So, if the statues were not
themselves worshiped, why are Israelites forbidden to have them? One
reason may be that they were inconsistent with monotheism: If Israel was
not permitted to have other gods, of course they could not have statues
of them. And the issue then was not making statues of the pagan gods but
making statues of YHWH. In the first place, YHWH was not to be
identified with any single force in nature. Likewise, a statue would
limit what YHWH was, identifying God with something visible in this
world. Moreover, multiple statues of YHWH in multiple places would not
be felt to be consistent with God’s oneness. In the Torah, only one
Temple is permitted, only one sacrificial altar. Sacrifice to YHWH is
not permitted anywhere else on earth (Leviticus 17; Deuteronomy 12).
Confirmation of the fact that the issue is making statues of YHWH comes
from archaeological evidence: small figures of females are extremely
common finds, but in all the excavations in Israel so far only two male
figures have ever been found. (And one of them, which my friend Yigal
Shiloh uncovered in the City of David excavations of biblical Jerusalem,
was clearly not Israelite.) That is, female figures often escaped the
ban on statues, but male figures did not—not because they were Baal or
Dagon figures, but because they could be YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ You shall not bow to them, and you shall not serve them. Because I,
YHWH, your God, am a jealous God, counting parents’ crime on children,
on the third generation, and on the fourth generation of those who hate
me,

---

Footnote 20:5. a jealous God. What could it mean for a god to be jealous? A pagan
deity might be thought to be jealous of another deity’s powers or
possessions but would not be jealous of another god’s existence.
Jealousy is a profoundly monotheistic quality in a god. The God of
Israel does not tolerate making a statue of another god, bowing to
another god, or serving another god, of any form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ but practicing kindness to thousands for those who love me and for
those who observe my commandments.

---

Footnote 20:6. thousands. Of generations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ You shall not bring up the name of YHWH, your God, for a falsehood,
because YHWH will not make one innocent who will bring up His name for a
falsehood.

---

Footnote 20:7. bring up His name for a falsehood. (Traditionally translated “take
His name in vain.”) This does not mean that one cannot say the divine
name in an exclamation—much less does it mean saying the words “God” or
“Lord” in an exclamation. It refers to falsehood. The term refers to a
false report (Exod 23:1) and a false witness (Deut 5:17; which
corresponds to the term “lying witness” here in Exod 20:13). This
commandment means that one cannot make an oath in God’s name and not
fulfill it. To appreciate the seriousness of this commandment, note the
case of Joshua, who is deceived by the Gibeonites into making an oath of
nonaggression. When Joshua learns that the Gibeonites are among the
Canaanite residents whom he was commanded by God to destroy, he lets
them live, disobeying a direct command from God rather than violate one
of the Ten Commandments (Joshua 9). And note the case of Jephthah, who
makes an oath to sacrifice the first thing to come out of his gate,
which turns out to be his daughter. He sacrifices her rather than
violate this commandment (Judges 11). (It is not reckoned legally as
murder. Human sacrifice is forbidden, but it is legally distinguished
from murder, which involves malice.) As horrible as this is (especially
in light of the Aqedah), it conveys the seriousness of this commandment
and of the principle that the Ten Commandments outweigh other laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ Remember the Sabbath day, to make it holy.

---

Footnote 20:8. the Sabbath. On the significance of the Sabbath, see the comments
on Gen 2:2 and 2:3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ Six days you shall labor and do all your work,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ and the seventh day is a Sabbath to YHWH, your God. You shall not do
any work: you and your son and your daughter, your servant and your maid
and your animal and your alien who is in your gates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ Because for six days YHWH made the skies and the earth, the sea, and
everything that is in them, and He rested on the seventh day. On account
of this, YHWH blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² Honor your father and your mother, so that your days will be extended
on the land that YHWH, your God, is giving you.

---

Footnote 20:12. your days will be extended on the land. My father taught me that
the commandment to honor one’s parents is the only commandment that
offers a reward.

People have sometimes understood these words to mean that the reward is
that if one honors one’s parents one will have a long life. That is not
a correct understanding. The commandment speaks of duration of days on
the land. It means that if the people of Israel is composed of
individuals who honor their parents then they will endure in their land.
This suggests the enormous importance of the fifth commandment relative
to the other nine. Those who honor their parents are likely to be people
who will not murder, steal, or violate the other commandments. In thus
preserving the terms of the covenant, they would be deserving of the
covenant promise of the homeland. At the same time, this is a
commandment on the father and mother as well: to be worthy of honor, and
to convey the value of the commandments themselves in such a way that
their children, in honoring the parents, will be moved to keep the
commandments.

This pivotal importance of the commandment to honor one’s parents may
account for its position in the order of the commandments: The first
four commandments concern the relationship between humans and God. The
last five concern the relationship between humans and other humans. And
the commandment that comes between—and connects?—these two groups is:
Honor your father and your mother!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ You shall not murder.

You shall not commit adultery.

You shall not steal.

You shall not testify against your neighbor as a lying witness.

---

Footnote 20:13. murder. Hebrew, like English, distinguishes between “murder” and
“killing.” “Murder” refers only to the taking of human life, and it is
subject to the death penalty only when committed with malicious intent.
The cases of manslaughter, killing through negligence, killing in war,
execution for crimes, killing animals, animals killing humans, and human
sacrifice are all treated separately from this in the Torah, and terms
other than “murder” are used. (On the special circumstance of the one
who murders without malice, see Deut 4:41–42.) At the time that I am
writing this, technology has raised new cases, including abortion and
assisted suicide. Whatever one’s view of these matters, one cannot
simply claim that they are prohibited by the commandment against murder.
One must argue whether they are consistent with the other cases that
constitute murder or if they belong among the cases that involve taking
life but still are not murder.

Footnote 20:13. adultery. It is commonly said that adultery in the Torah is
defined as sex between a man and a married woman—but not between a
single woman and a married man. The reason for this definition is that
ancient Israel was polygamous, and it was acceptable for a man to have
several wives or concubines (as long as none of them was married to
another man). But now, for those who live in monogamous societies, the
issue for either spouse is the same: violation of their marriage
commitment to each other. Sex with someone other than one’s spouse is
equally prohibited for husbands and wives by this commandment.

Footnote 20:13. neighbor. See the explanation of this term on Lev 19:18.

Footnote 20:13. lying witness. Is false testimony not already forbidden by the
command against taking God’s name in vain by lying in an oath sworn to
God? This question assumes that testimony in court was in fact taken
under oath in biblical times. But: (1) The Torah does not say that oaths
are required—except for the case of the suspected adulteress in Numbers
5. (2) The case of the suspected adulteress may well be the exception
that proves that the rule was not to take oaths. (3) The inclusion in
the Decalogue of this commandment against being a false witness appears
to me to be itself the evidence that testimony was not taken under oath,
because, if it were, this commandment would indeed be unnecessary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ You shall not covet your neighbor’s house. You shall not covet your
neighbor’s wife or his servant or his maid or his ox or his ass or
anything that your neighbor has.

---

Footnote 20:14. covet. This comes at the end of the Ten Commandments, and it is
different: it commands regarding an emotional state. This seems like an
extra burden, but it comes as a help. It is saying: Do you want some
help to avoid breaking the other commandments? Very well, don’t covet!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And all the people were seeing the thunders and the flashes and the
sound of the horn and the mountain smoking. And the people saw, and they
moved and stood at a distance,

---

Footnote 20:15. the people saw. The Masoretic Text reads “saw,” but the Greek,
Samaritan, and other versions of the text read “were afraid.” The
consonants of the Hebrew words for “saw” and for “were afraid” are the
same (). “Were afraid” is probably correct, because Moses tells
the people, “Don’t be afraid,” two verses later. This technical point of
Hebrew consonants is important because it establishes the people’s state
of mind: hearing the voice of God terrifies them, and that is why they
tell Moses, “Let God not speak with us or else we’ll die.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ and they said to Moses, “You speak with us so we may listen, but let
God not speak with us or else we’ll die.”

---

Footnote 20:16. You speak with us. The absence of prophecy in Genesis—in the way
that it is usually meant in the rest of the Hebrew Bible—is not
extraordinary, for prophecy by its very essence relates to a community;
and Genesis, as we have already observed, is primarily about
individuals, not communities. The birth of prophecy in Exodus is related
to the birth of the Israelite community in this book. In Exodus, YHWH
initially sends Moses with His words to the Israelites and to the
Egyptians. That is already a straightforward depiction of prophecy, but,
more crucially, the book proceeds to formalize the prophetic role. When
the Israelites come to Sinai, YHWH personally speaks directly to the
entire nation, pronouncing the Ten Commandments aloud from the sky. The
Israelites’ response here is to tell Moses: “You speak with us so we may
listen, but let God not speak with us or else we’ll die.” From this
moment on, all revelation to Israel is mediated by a prophet. God never
speaks directly to the people again in any book of the Tanak.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And Moses said to the people, “Don’t be afraid, because God is coming
for the purpose of testing you and for the purpose that his fear will be
on your faces so that you won’t sin.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And the people stood at a distance, and Moses went over to the nimbus
where God was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And YHWH said to Moses, “You shall say this to the children of
Israel: You have seen that I have spoken with you from the skies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ You shall not make gods of silver with me, and you shall not make gods
of gold for yourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ You shall make an altar of earth for me, and you shall sacrifice on it
your burnt offerings and your peace offerings, your sheep and your oxen.
In every place where I’ll have my name commemorated I’ll come to you,
and I’ll bless you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And if you’ll make an altar of stones for me, you shall not make them
cut. When you have elevated your sword over it, then you have desecrated
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And you shall not go up by stairs on my altar, so that your nudity
will not be exposed over it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 20:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------
