------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

24

¹ And He said to Moses, “Come up to YHWH: you and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu,
and seventy of Israel’s elders, and bow from a distance.

---

Footnote 24:1. from a distance. This account has a multitude of parallels to the
account of the binding of Isaac (Genesis 22): Moses says the same words
to the elders that Abraham says to the servant boys: “Sit here … we’ll
come back to you.” The Exodus account has servant boys
(n‘rîm) as well. Both accounts use the term “from a
distance” (mrq). Both use the term “to bow”
(hištawôt). Both Moses and Abraham come up a mountain.
Both have a burnt offering (ha‘lôt ‘ôlh). The two accounts
share a chain of ten verbs: “and he said,” “and he took … and he set,”
“and he got up early,” “and he built an altar,” “and he put out his
hand,” “and he/it was,” “and he/they got up,” “and he/they came,” “and
he/they saw.” All these parallels alert us to the fact that some
important connection exists here. The culminating parallels indicate
what that connection is: Abraham is rewarded at the end “because you did
this thing”; and the people in Exodus promise that “We’ll do all the
things.” Abraham is rewarded because “you listened to my voice”; and
Exodus reports that “they said with one voice,” and they say, “we’ll
listen.” So (1) this is a reminder that the merit of Abraham remains the
basis on which all of this now happens. (2) This is a fulfillment of
promises made following Abraham’s acts of extraordinary obedience. And
(3) Abraham’s obedience is an example for the people to emulate.

The contrast is striking as well. Abraham’s obedience is the centerpiece
of the first story. In this second story, the people will soon commit
their worst act of disobedience, the golden calf event.

Note also: The first story is at “the mountain of YHWH.” The second is
at “the mountain of God.” And both state that they are about divine
appearances. The divine appearances mark the sacredness of the two
mountain locations. The “mountain of God” is Horeb/Sinai. The identity
of the “mountain of YHWH” is uncertain, although elsewhere it refers to
the location of the Temple in Jerusalem. The parallels of these two
stories connect the mountain where the greatest revelation takes place
to the mountain where the divine promise was confirmed in the past—and
where the Temple will stand in the future. (The location of the Temple
is identified with the place of the binding of Isaac—Moriah—in 2 Chr

Footnote 3:1.) The two sacred mountains are connected; the patriarch and his
descendants are connected; past, present, and future are connected—all
in the embroidery of the Torah’s wording.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And Moses will come over alone to YHWH, and they shall not come over,
and the people shall not come up with him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And Moses came and told the people all of YHWH’s words and all the
judgments. And all the people answered, one voice, and they said, “We’ll
do all the things that YHWH has spoken.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And Moses wrote all of YHWH’s words. And he got up early in the morning
and built an altar below the mountain and twelve pillars for twelve
tribes of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And he sent young men of the children of Israel, and they made burnt
offerings, and they made peace-offering sacrifices to YHWH: bulls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And Moses took half of the blood and set it in basins and threw half of
the blood on the altar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And he took the scroll of the covenant and read in the people’s ears.
And they said, “We’ll do everything that YHWH has spoken, and we’ll
listen.”

---

Footnote 24:7. We’ll do … and we’ll listen. It has been noted that the word order
here seems backward: doesn’t one have to listen to the command before
one can do it?! The promises to do and to listen come together in the
order of this sentence in the Hebrew, so it may be that they were a
known formula, constituting an oath of absolute obedience. But I
understand them to be separate: The people’s promise to do the
commandments is a repetition of what they had said before in v. 3. They
repeat it formally now because Moses has just read them the written
document. The people’s promise to listen is, as Rashbam wrote, a further
promise, a commitment to follow the things that their God will say to
them in the future. In Hebrew as in English, words for “listening” also
imply obeying, as in: “Listen to your mother!” “Do you hear me?!” (As an
alternative and more banal explanation of the seemingly backward order:
the Septuagint has the two words in reverse order.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And Moses took the blood and threw it on the people, and he said, “Here
is the blood of the covenant that YHWH has made with you regarding all
these things.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of Israel’s elders
went up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And they saw the God of Israel. And below His feet it was like a
structure of sapphire brick and like the essence of the skies for
clarity.

24:10–11. And they saw God. … And they envisioned God. Some have taken
this to mean that they literally, physically see God. But, as Ibn Ezra
properly observed, the verb for “they saw” (Hebrew r’h) is also used to
refer to seeing in a vision, as when Isaiah says, “I saw the Lord
sitting on a throne” (Isa 6:1). This meaning of “they saw” here is
confirmed by the parallel use in v. 11 of the word “envisioned” (Hebrew
zh), which regularly means to have a vision (as, for example in
Isa 1:1). Also, this is consistent with the idea that no one ever sees
the actual form of God except Moses on a single occasion. This idea is
understood throughout the Tanak, without exception. (On the distinction
between vision and regular experience, see The Hidden Face of God, pp.
17–18, 62–63.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And He did not put out His hand to the chiefs of the children of
Israel. And they envisioned God. And they ate and drank.

---

Footnote 24:11. He did not put out His hand. Those who take the passage to mean
that this group actually sees God understand “He did not put out His
hand” to mean that God does not kill them for seeing God. But the text
says “He did not put out His hand to the chiefs …” The phrase “to put
out one’s hand” followed by the preposition “to” (Hebrew ’el) never
refers to killing in the Tanak. (When referring to killing, the phrase
occurs with the preposition b.) And, in any case, there are other
cases of the expression of God putting out a hand to humans that are
meant positively. In Ps 144:7, this refers to God saving someone. And
there is an even closer parallel in Jer 1:9, where it takes place in a
vision and refers to God reaching out to touch Jeremiah’s mouth to
enable him to speak. Here in Exodus, perhaps it means that in their
vision they see but are not touched by God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And YHWH said to Moses, “Come up to me, to the mountain, and be there,
and I’ll give you stone tablets and the instruction and the commandment
that I’ve written to instruct them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And Moses and Joshua, his attendant, got up, and Moses went up to the
Mountain of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And he said to the elders, “Sit for us here until we’ll come back to
you. And here, Aaron and Hur are with you. Let whoever has any matters
go over to them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And Moses went up to the mountain. And the cloud covered the mountain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And YHWH’s glory settled on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six
days. And He called to Moses on the seventh day from inside the cloud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And the appearance of YHWH’s glory was like a consuming fire in the
mountaintop before the eyes of the children of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 24:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And Moses came inside the cloud and went up into the mountain. And
Moses was in the mountain forty days and forty nights.
