------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

32

¹ And the people saw that Moses was delaying to come down from the
mountain, and the people assembled at Aaron and said to him, “Get up.
Make gods for us who will go in front of us, because this Moses, the man
who brought us up from the land of Egypt: we don’t know what has become
of him!”

---

Footnote 32:1. this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt. They
talk about Moses as if it is necessary to identify who he is. That is,
they minimize him and push him into the past tense, to make the case to
Aaron that he should act.

Footnote 32:1. the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt. Less than forty
days earlier they heard the divine voice itself say that God brought
them out of Egypt, but, like the wine steward and Joseph’s Pharaoh, they
still focus on the human rather than on the deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And Aaron said to them, “Take off the gold rings that are in your
wives’, your sons’, and your daughters’ ears, and bring them to me.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And all the people took off the gold rings that were in their ears and
brought them to Aaron.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And he took them from their hand and fashioned it with a stylus and
made it a molten calf.

And they said, “These are your gods, Israel, who brought you up from the
land of Egypt!”

---

Footnote 32:4. calf. “Calf” is a bit misleading. It is a young bull. I retained
the word “calf” in the translation because the episode is now famous as
the “golden calf” story.

32:4–5. These are your gods.... And Aaron saw … A festival to YHWH
tomorrow. So many questions: Why do they use the plural, “These are your
gods,” when there is only one calf? What did Aaron see? Why does he
proclaim a festival to YHWH in the middle of a pagan heresy? I gave the
critical explanation of these problems elsewhere (see Who Wrote the
Bible?). Here I want to give a pesat explanation of them as they appear
in the text. The plural “gods” does not appear to refer to the calf. In
the pagan religions of the ancient Near East, people did not worship
animals, and they did not worship idols. They worshiped gods who were
represented or honored by statues. The gods were sometimes pictured as
enthroned on a platform, and the platform was commonly composed of
figures of cherubs or of young bulls. Since there is only one young bull
here, together with plural “gods,” we must understand the people to be
perceiving the bull as a throne platform for gods whom they will
worship. Note that the calf itself is not referred to as an idol.

What Aaron sees is this behavior on the people’s part. The text does not
reveal what Aaron has in mind when he makes the golden calf: does he
mean it as a throne platform for such pagan deities, or as a throne
platform for YHWH?! All we know is that, after he sees the people
associating it with gods and claiming that these gods brought them out
of Egypt, he declares that the worship that is to take place is “A
festival to YHWH!” (Indeed, the word for “And Aaron saw” is Hebrew
. In the original Hebrew text, before the vowels were added, it
can also have meant “And Aaron was afraid”! That would make it even
clearer why he would redirect the worship back to YHWH.) Aaron is not
completely innocent in the matter of the golden calf, as we can see from
the defense he offers to Moses afterward (32:24); but it may be that he
is to be credited as a person who recognizes that he has made a
dangerous mistake and tries to turn it to something good. In recognizing
his own error, and in trying to steer a people who have gone wrong onto
a different course, Aaron becomes an extraordinarily valuable model—and
the story teaches an extraordinarily valuable lesson.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And Aaron saw, and he built an altar in front of it, and Aaron called,
and he said, “A festival to YHWH tomorrow!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And they got up early the next day, and they made burnt offerings and
brought over peace offerings, and the people sat down to eat and drink,
and they got up to fool around.

---

Footnote 32:6. fool around. Some of the occurrences of this word involve sex (Gen
26:8; 39:14,17), and some do not (Gen 19:14; 21:9; Judg 16:25). It is
not justified, therefore, to assume that sexual play is implied here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And YHWH spoke to Moses: “Go. Go down. Because your people, whom you
brought up from the land of Egypt, has corrupted.

---

Footnote 32:7. your people, whom you brought up from the land of Egypt. The issue
of who brought the people out, which came up in v. 1, now has an
extraordinary twist. Like a parent who says to one’s spouse about a
naughty child, “Guess what your child did today!”—so God now says to
Moses, “Your people, whom you brought up from the land of Egypt, has
corrupted!” But look at Moses’ words in response. He seeks to appeal to
God’s compassion and feelings for the people, and so he turns the
pronoun around, saying, “Why should your anger flare at your people,
whom you brought out from the land of Egypt? … Relent about the bad to
your people.” And the text conveys that Moses’ case is successful,
because it concludes: “YHWH relented about the bad that He had spoken,
to do to His people”!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ They’ve turned quickly from the way that I commanded them. They’ve made
themselves a molten calf, and they’ve bowed to it and sacrificed to it
and said, ‘These are your gods, Israel, who brought you up from the land
of Egypt!’”

---

Footnote 32:8. They’ve turned quickly. How could they have committed the golden
calf sin so soon after the revelation—within forty days after actually
hearing God speak from the sky? It is when God is closest that humans
commit the greatest sin. Similarly in the story of Eden, where God walks
among humans, they violate a direct command. Similarly through the
wilderness period to come, in which the people see miracles daily
(manna, column of cloud and fire), they are repeatedly rebellious. It
appears that close proximity to divinity—to an all-seeing, all-knowing
divine parent who is always watching, commanding, and judging—is barely
tolerable for human beings. Like adolescents who love and need their
parents but who long for independence, humankind is pictured as longing
to be out of the divine shadow. Note that at the end of the Tanak, in
the books of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther, there are no miracles, angels,
or appearances of God. The words “And God spoke to” never occur. And in
these books, where God is the least visible, humans are pictured as
relatively good, listening to their leaders, changing their ways when
criticized, and observing the commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And YHWH said to Moses, “I’ve seen this people; and, here, it’s a
hard-necked people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And now, leave off from me, and my anger will flare at them, and I’ll
finish them, and I’ll make you into a big nation!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And Moses conciliated in front of YHWH, his God, and said, “Why, YHWH,
should your anger flare at your people whom you brought out from the
land of Egypt with big power and with a strong hand?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² Why should Egypt say, saying, ‘He brought them out for bad, to kill
them in the mountains, and to finish them from on the face of the
earth’? Turn back from your flaring anger, and relent about the bad to
your people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants, that you swore to
them by yourself, and you spoke to them: ‘I’ll multiply your seed like
the stars of the skies, and I’ll give to your seed all this land that
I’ve said, and they’ll possess it forever.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And YHWH relented about the bad that He had spoken, to do to His
people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And Moses turned and went down from the mountain. And the two tablets
of witness were in his hand, tablets written from their two sides: from
this side and from this side they were written.

---

Footnote 32:15. tablets of witness. It is a crucial concept here and in
Deuteronomy (and Kings) that there is written witness/testimony
confirming what God has said, so subsequent generations can never say,
“We didn’t know.” Even though the people have actually heard it from the
voice of God, the Sinai covenant is a legal procedure and requires a
formal, written document. The Noahic and Abrahamic covenants are sealed
with a divine oath; and, since God’s violating His own promise is
unthinkable, no document is required. But the Sinai covenant is sealed
by the people’s promise that “We’ll do it, and we’ll listen”; and human
commitments require written witness. That is why there are tablets, and
that is why they are called the tablets of witness.

Footnote 32:15. written from their two sides. Does this mean: written on both
tablets? or written on both the front and the back of each tablet? The
former seems too obvious to require this mention: of course it is
written on both tablets; otherwise, why have two tablets? So the point
here is precisely that they are written on both sides of each tablet.
For pictorial purposes (in art and film), it is preferable to put the
commandments all on the same side of each tablet, but the text suggests
otherwise. And we know of numerous ancient royal inscriptions and
statues that were written on both sides, front and back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And the tablets: they were God’s doing. And the writing: it was God’s
writing, inscribed on the tablets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And Joshua heard the sound of the people in its shouting, and he said
to Moses, “A sound of war is in the camp.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And he said, “It’s not a sound of singing of victory, and it’s not a
sound of singing of defeat. It’s just the sound of singing I hear!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And it was when he came close to the camp, and he saw the calf and
dancing: and Moses’ anger flared, and he threw the tablets from his
hands and shattered them below the mountain.

---

Footnote 32:19. Moses’ anger flared. God had said, “My anger will flare at them,”
but Moses dissuaded God, saying, “Why should your anger flare at your
people?” But when Moses himself returns to the people and sees the bull,
the text reports that “his anger flared,” the very words for what he
persuaded God not to do! He smashes the tablets that he was bringing
back to the people, and he calls for a bloody purge of thousands among
the people. Quintessentially among prophets, Moses comes to God as a
human, pleading the human case; and he comes to the people as a
confidant of God, feeling the divine disappointment and anger with
humans (albeit apparently still lacking the divine restraint and
capacity to relent). It is the curse of the prophet: to God he
represents humans, and to humans he represents God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And he took the calf that they had made, and he burned it in fire and
ground it until it was thin, and he scattered it on the face of the
water, and he made the children of Israel drink!

---

Footnote 32:20. thin. In Deut 9:21, Moses elaborates that this means “thin as
dust.” Many English translations say “ground it to powder.”

Footnote 32:20. he scattered it on the face of the water. What water? It is
natural to find streams at the bases of mountains, but in fact the last
water mentioned is the water that came out of the crag of Horeb/Sinai.
That would add irony: that the water that ended one rebellion now
carries off the product of the next rebellion. And, as the people now
see the dust of the golden calf on the water, they may be reminded that
this water came to them from God and through Moses, whom they have been
quick to forget.

Footnote 32:20. he made the children of Israel drink. Classical and recent
commentators have compared this to the law of a woman suspected of
adultery (sh), who must drink a mixture of dust and
water (Num 5:11–31). Indeed, both cases use the unusual word pr‘ (see
comment on 32:25 below). And the issue in both is betrayal. The
prophets, most notably Hosea, compare the people’s turning to other gods
with adultery. Still, I urge great caution in interpreting the
connection. The people in Exodus are guilty! The sh
case is a process designed to determine whether someone is guilty or
innocent. And the dust there comes from the Tabernacle, which is
something positive, while the dust of the calf here is the opposite. The
similarities between the two matters may reflect only very general
common concerns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And Moses said to Aaron, “What did this people do to you, that you’ve
brought a big sin on it?!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And Aaron said, “Let my lord’s anger not flare. You know the people,
that it’s in a bad state.

---

Footnote 32:22. in a bad state. In the sense of “in for trouble,” “up to no
good,” or “in a sorry state.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And they said to me, ‘Make gods for us who will go in front of us,
because this Moses, the man who brought us up from the land of Egypt: we
don’t know what has become of him!’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And I said to them, ‘Whoever has gold: take it off.’ And they gave it
to me, and I threw it into the fire, and this calf came out!”

---

Footnote 32:24. and this calf came out. A strong lie uses as much of the truth as
possible. Aaron quotes the people exactly. Then he quotes his own words
with slight changes. And then he transforms the production of the calf
from his own fashioning to “and this calf came out!” He also addresses
Moses as “my lord,” and he emphasizes the people’s bad state. Thus, in a
very brief response he does a great deal to minimize any culpability of
his own.

Why is there no consequence for Aaron? Some say that the consequence is
the deaths of his sons Nadab and Abihu (Leviticus 10). Alternatively,
the answer may be that just prior to the making of the calf God has
designated Aaron as the people’s high priest. In that position he cannot
suffer any direct punishment from God, which would both disqualify him
and demean the office of high priest. And so what is left is for Aaron
to make amends through personal atonement. (The same would apply to the
case in which he and Miriam criticize Moses about his wife. Miriam
becomes leprous, but Aaron does not suffer any consequence. See the
comment on Num 12:11.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And Moses saw the people, that it was turned loose, because Aaron had
turned it loose—to denigration among their adversaries!

---

Footnote 32:25. turned it loose. The word in Hebrew consonants is pr‘h, a pun on
the word “Pharaoh.” Aaron has “Pharaohed” the people; he has done
something to them that Pharaohs had done: made them ignoble in the eyes
of those who oppose them. Or one could say that he has brought them back
to the condition in which they were before the Sinai revelation: in
disarray, without the law.

Footnote 32:25. denigration. Scornful whispering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁶ And Moses stood in the gate of the camp and said, “Whoever is for
YHWH: to me!” And all the children of Levi were gathered to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:27

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁷ And he said to them, “YHWH, God of Israel, said this: ‘Set, each man,
his sword on his thigh; cross over and come back from gate to gate in
the camp; and kill, each man, his brother and, each man, his neighbor
and, each man, his relative.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:28

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁸ And the children of Levi did according to Moses’ word, and about three
thousand men fell from the people in that day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:29

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁹ And Moses said, “Fill your hand to YHWH today—because each man was at
his son and at his brother—and to put a blessing on you today.”

---

Footnote 32:29. Fill your hand. This phrase refers to volunteering for divine
service. See the comment on 28:41.

Footnote 32:29. to YHWH today—because each man was at his son and at his
brother—and to put a blessing on you today. The grammar of this verse is
difficult in the Hebrew and more so in translation. It appears to mean
that, because of the Levites’ violent zeal, they are now chosen to
consecrate themselves as Israel’s priesthood and are to receive divine
blessing. It is ironic that Levi is criticized in Jacob’s deathbed
blessing for his violent slaughter in Shechem (Gen 34:25; 49:5–7), but
Levi’s descendants are rewarded for a violent slaughter here. The lesson
may be that an act is not judged, in the Torah, apart from its
circumstances. What the Levites do in response to a heresy of
destiny-changing proportions is not comparable to Levi’s (and Simeon’s)
massacre of a city in response to the offense committed by their ruler’s
son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:30

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁰ And it was on the next day, and Moses said to the people, “You’ve
committed a big sin. And now I’ll go up to YHWH. Perhaps I may make
atonement for your sin.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:31

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³¹ And Moses went back to YHWH and said, “Please, this people has
committed a big sin and made gods of gold for themselves.

---

Footnote 32:31. Please. This word, Hebrew ’nnâ, occurs only twice in the
Torah, here and in Gen 50:17; and in both instances it is used in the
context of asking someone to “bear a sin.” In both cases it is a
tremendous sin, and in both cases there are no grounds for defense. It
is thus a particle that expresses emotional entreaty. Interestingly, the
case in Genesis 50 is the plea by Joseph’s brothers to forgive them for
what they did to him, and Joseph does in fact forgive them. Again the
story of Moses and the Israelites contains an allusion to a story from
the era of the patriarchs, hinting to the reader that there is reason
for hope; for if a great man can forgive, certainly God can as well.

Footnote 32:31. gods of gold. Or “a god of gold.” It is uncertain whether Moses
refers here to the calf statue as a god or if he refers to gods for whom
the calf is a throne dais.

Footnote 32:31. made gods of gold for themselves. Moses does not describe what
they have done in the language of the Ten Commandments (“You shall not
make a statue or any form … ”); he rather uses the wording of one of the
commands that come later: “You shall not make gods of gold for
yourselves” (Exod 20:20). Breaking one of the Ten Commandments is far
more serious than a violation of the other commandments of the Torah,
because the Ten Commandments form the text of the Sinai covenant, and to
violate them is to breach the covenant itself. There are cases in the
Tanak in which individuals or the nation are faced with a choice of
breaking one of the Ten Commandments or else one of the other laws. They
choose to break the other laws, even though there are terrible
consequences, rather than break one of the Ten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:32

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³² And now, if you will bear their sin—and if not, wipe me out from your
scroll that you’ve written.”

---

Footnote 32:32. if you will bear their sin—and if not … Moses seems to break his
sentence in the middle and jump to the other side of the coin: “If you
will bear their sin”—then what? Perhaps there is nothing to say. He is
not in a position to offer God a reward if He does bear their sin. He
can only turn to the alternative: “If you won’t bear their sin, then
wipe me out from your scroll …”

Footnote 32:32. your scroll that you’ve written. The reference is either to the
scroll of the Covenant Code (Exod 24:7) or to the scroll concerning
Amalek (17:14). In the account of the Amalek scroll, the same word that
is used here for “to wipe out” occurs twice. Moses may be implying,
“Please do this, or else erase me from history the way you said you
would erase Amalek.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:33

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³³ And YHWH said to Moses, “The one who has sinned against me, I’ll wipe
him out from my scroll.

32:33–34. The one who has sinned against me, I’ll wipe him out.... And
now, go. Moses’ gesture is both selfless and audacious at the same time.
He takes a great risk to himself for the sake of winning forgiveness for
his people, but at the same time he is speaking more boldly to God than
he has dared to do before—and he is ascribing much importance to himself
in assuming that “wipe me out of your scroll” carries enough weight to
affect a divine decision. But God’s answer seems to brush aside Moses’
gesture, as if to say, “Don’t tell me whom to write in my scroll. I’ll
do whatever I’ll do. Now, go.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:34

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁴ And now, go. Lead the people to where I spoke to you. Here, my angel
will go ahead of you. And, in the day that I take account, I’ll account
their sin on them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Exodus 32:35

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁵ And YHWH struck the people because they had made the calf, which Aaron
had made.

---

Footnote 32:35. they had made the calf, which Aaron had made. Some have taken
this wording to be a scribal error because it says both that the people
made it and that Aaron made it. (And some of the versions say: “they had
served the calf which Aaron had made.”) But both did make it, and both
are culpable. The community produced the calf: initiating the event,
asking for gods to be made, contributing the gold, responding to the
finished product. And Aaron was responsible in two ways: as the leader
of the community and as the one who fashioned the calf. A group and an
individual who acts as the group’s agent share in the responsibility for
the things they do.
