------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹ In the beginning of God’s creating the skies and the earth

---

Footnote 1:1. In the beginning of God’s creating the skies and the earth. Rashi
began his commentary with the remark that the Torah could have begun
with the first commandment to Israel—the commandment to observe
Passover—which does not come until Exodus 12, rather than with creation.
He answered that it begins with creation in order to establish God’s
ownership of all the world—and therefore God’s right to give the
promised land to Israel. I suggest that the lesson that we learn from
the fact that the Torah does not begin with the first commandment is
precisely that the commandments are not the sole purpose of the Torah.
The Torah’s story is no less important than the commandments that it
contains. Law in the Bible is never given separately from history. The
Ten Commandments do not begin with the first “Thou shalt” but with the
historical fact that “I brought you out of the land of Egypt …”

Another lesson is that, in the Torah, the divine bond with Israel is
ultimately tied to the divine relationship with all of humankind. (Rashi
did not refer to the first commandment, which is “Be fruitful and
multiply” and is given to all humankind, but rather to the first
commandment to Israel, which is Passover.) The first eleven chapters
establish a connection between God and the entire universe. They depict
the formation of a relationship between the creator and all the families
of the earth. This relationship will remain as the crucial background to
the story of Israel that will take up the rest of the Torah.

Footnote 1:1. In the beginning of God’s creating the skies and the earth. The
Torah begins with two pictures of the creation. The first (Gen 1:1–2:3)
is a universal conception. The second (2:4–25) is more down-to-earth.
The first has a cosmic feeling about it. Few other passages in the
Hebrew Bible generate this feeling. The concern of the Hebrew Bible
generally is history, not the cosmos, but Genesis 1 is an exception.
There is a power about this portrait of a transcendent God constructing
the skies and earth in an ordered seven-day series. In it, the stages of
the fashioning of the heavenly bodies above are mixed with the
fashioning of the land and seas below.

The translation of the Torah’s first phrase is a classic problem. Even
at the risk of a slightly awkward English, I have translated this line
literally, not only to make it reflect the Hebrew, but to show the
significant parallel between this opening and the opening of the second
picture of creation in Gen 2:4, thus:

(The second line is translated slightly differently above because it is
not possible to reproduce the doubled divine identification, YHWH God,
with a possessive in English.) Note that this first, universal
conception puts the skies first, while the second, more earthly account
starts with earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

—² when the earth had been shapeless and formless, and darkness was on
the face of the deep, and God’s spirit was hovering on the face of the
water—

---

Footnote 1:2. the earth had been. Here is a case in which a tiny point of grammar
makes a difference for theology. In the Hebrew of this verse, the noun
comes before the verb (in the perfect form). This is now known to be the
way of conveying the past perfect in Biblical Hebrew. This point of
grammar means that this verse does not mean “the earth was shapeless and
formless”—referring to the condition of the earth starting the instant
after it was created. This verse rather means that “the earth had been
shapeless and formless”—that is, it had already existed in this
shapeless condition prior to the creation. Creation of matter in the
Torah is not out of nothing (creatio ex nihilo), as many have claimed.
And the Torah is not claiming to be telling events from the beginning of
time.

Footnote 1:2. shapeless and formless. The two words in the Hebrew,
th and bh, are understood to mean virtually
the same thing. This is the first appearance in the Torah of a
phenomenon in biblical language known as hendiadys, in which two
connected words are used to signify one thing. (“Wine and beer” [Lev
10:9] may be a hendiadys as well, or it may be a merism, a similar
construction in which two words are used to signify a totality; so that
“wine and beer” means all alcoholic beverages.) The hendiadys of
“th and bh,” plus the references to the deep
and the water, yields a picture of an undifferentiated, shapeless fluid
that had existed prior to creation.

Footnote 1:2. God’s spirit. Or “wind of God.” Words for “soul” or “spirit” in
Hebrew frequently denote wind or breath (likewise in Greek: pneuma means
both wind and spirit). This suggests that, in the ancient world, life
was associated, in the first place, with respiration, as opposed to
later determinations of life in terms of blood circulation or brain
activity. Thus the animation of the first human will be described this
way: “And He blew into his nostrils the breath of life, and the human
became a living being.”

Footnote 1:2. God’s spirit/wind hovering on the face of the water. The parallel
with the ancient pagan creation myth of the wind god (Enlil, or Marduk)
defeating the goddess of the waters (Tiamat; compare Hebrew thôm,
translated “the deep,” in this verse) is striking. The difference
between the two is striking, too: in the Torah the water and all other
components of the universe are no longer regarded as gods. Nature is
demythologized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ God said, “Let there be light.” And there was light.

---

Footnote 1:3. Let there be light. God creates light simply by saying the words:
“Let there be” (the Hebrew jussive). Only light is expressly created
from nothing (creatio ex nihilo). All other elements of creation may
possibly be formed out of preexisting matter, that is, from the
initially undifferentiated chaos. Thus God later says, “Let there be a
space,” but the text then adds, “And God made the space.” And God says,
“Let there be sources of light,” but the text adds, “And God made the
sources of light.” So we cannot understand these things to be formed
simply by the words “Let there be.” Now we can appreciate the importance
of understanding the Torah’s first words correctly: The Torah does not
claim to report everything that has occurred since the beginning of
space and time. It does not say, “In the beginning, God created the
skies and the earth.” It rather says, “In the beginning of God’s
creating the skies and the earth, when the earth had been shapeless and
formless …” That is, there is preexisting matter, which is in a state of
watery chaos. Subsequent matter—dry land, heavenly bodies, plants,
animals—may be formed out of this undifferentiated fluid. In Greece, the
first philosopher, Thales, later proposed such a concept, that all
things derive from water. Examples from other cultures could be cited as
well. There appears to be an essential human feeling that everything
derives originally from water, which is hardly surprising given that
we—and all life on this planet—did in fact proceed from water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And God saw the light, that it was good, and God separated between the
light and the darkness.

---

Footnote 1:4. God separated. Initially there is only the watery chaos: shapeless
and formless. Then creation is the making of distinctions: “And God
separated between the light and the darkness,” “And separated between
the water that was under the space and the water that was above the
space.” Then more distinctions: between dry land and seas, among plants
and animals “each according to its kind,” between day and night, and so
on. In each case, creation is the act of separating a thing from the
rest of matter and then giving it a name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And God called the light “day” and called the darkness “night.” And
there was evening, and there was morning: one day.

---

Footnote 1:5. God called the light “day” and called the darkness “night.” The
first day also includes the creation of the ordering of time. Before the
invention of day and night, time no less than space would be
undifferentiated: “formless.” Light, the one thing that is totally ex
nihilo, is thus essential to all that follows: the separating between
light and dark in an ordered arrangement initiates a sequence of
distinctions of time and space, and these distinctions embody creation.

Footnote 1:5. And there was evening, and there was morning. It is sometimes
claimed mistakenly that Genesis 1 is poetry. True, the wording is
powerful and beautiful, and the recurring words “And there was evening,
and there was morning” and the chronology that they reflect lend a
formulaic order to the chapter. But that does not make the text poetry.
It is prose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And God said, “Let there be a space within the water, and let it
separate between water and water.”

---

Footnote 1:6. space. The distinction between “the water that was under the space
and the water that was above the space” is particularly important and
was frequently confusing to readers who were not certain of the meaning
of the old term for this space: “firmament.” As Rashi perceived, the
text pictures a territory formed in the middle of the watery chaos, a
giant bubble of air surrounded on all sides by water. Once the land is
created, the universe as pictured in Genesis is a habitable bubble, with
land and seas at its base, surrounded by a mass of water. Like this:

God calls the space “skies.” “The skies” (or “heavens”) here refer
simply to space, to the sky that we see, and not to some other, unseen
place where God dwells or where people dwell after their death.

The reference to “water that was above the space” presumably reflects
the fact that when the ancients looked at the sky they understood from
its blue color that there was water up there above the air. As when we
look out at the horizon on a clear day and can barely distinguish where
the blue sea ends and the blue sky begins, so they pictured the earth as
surrounded by water above and below. The space was the invisible
substance that holds the upper waters back. It is important to
appreciate this picture of the cosmos with which the Torah begins or one
cannot understand other matters that come later, especially the story of
the flood. See the comment on Gen 7:11.

Footnote 1:6. Let there be a space. The “firmament” is either the entire air
space or, more probably, just the transparent edge of the space, like a
glass dome (Ramban says “like a tent”), which is actually up against the
water. It is difficult to say which. The Hebrew root of the word,
, refers to the way in which a goldsmith hammers gold leaf very
thin. This may suggest that the firmament is best understood to be the
thin outermost layer of the air space. Still, we must be cautious not to
commit the etymological fallacy. That means: we should not automatically
derive the meaning of a word from its root. People commonly make this
mistake because the Hebrew of the Tanak is so beautifully constructed
around three-letter roots. Looking for root meanings is usually very
helpful. But sometimes it can lead to misunderstandings. Words can
evolve away from their root meanings over centuries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And God made the space, and it separated between the water that was
under the space and the water that was above the space. And it was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And God called the space “skies.” And there was evening, and there was
morning: a second day.

---

Footnote 1:8. God called the space “skies.” The space (or “firmament”) and the
sky are the same thing. This appears to be an explanation of what the
sky is. It is a transparent shell or space that holds back the upper
waters.

Footnote 1:8. a second day. The first day’s account concludes with the cardinal
number: “one day.” All of the following accounts conclude with ordinal
numbers: “a second day,” “a third day,” and so on. This sets off the
first day more blatantly as something special in itself rather than
merely the first step in an order. It may be because the first day’s
creation—light—is qualitatively different from all other things. Or it
may be because the opening day involves the birth of creation itself. Or
it may be that the first unit involves the creation of a day as an
entity. A more mundane explanation—which is presumably the pš
a–would be that this simply is a known biblical form, which has
no special meaning for the matter of creation, because it occurs
elsewhere as well. See the numbering of the four rivers of Eden, which
likewise uses the cardinal “one” and then the ordinals “second, third,
fourth” (Gen 2:11–14; see also 2 Sam 4:2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And God said, “Let the waters be concentrated under the skies into one
place, and let the land appear.” And it was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And God called the land “earth,” and called the concentration of the
waters “seas.” And God saw that it was good.

---

Footnote 1:10. God saw that it was good. God observes the day’s product to be
good on every day except the second day. Instead, the text says “it was
good” twice on the third day. Rashi suggested that this is because the
task of the division of the waters was begun on the second day but not
finished until the third. But, in that case, one might still ask why the
task had to be thus split between two days. The reason why the second
day’s work—the formation of the space, with water above and below—is not
pronounced “good” may rather be that God will later choose to break this
structure (in the flood story, Gen 7:11). The double notice that “it was
good” on the third day may be because (1) the formation of land and (2)
the land’s generation of plants are each regarded as creations worthy of
notice.

This explanation is based on the Masoretic Text (MT). The Greek text
(Septuagint), on the other hand, includes the words “And God saw that it
was good” on the second day as well. It may be that these words were
simply omitted from the MT by a scribe whose eye jumped from the first
two letters of this line (Hebrew ) to the beginning of the next
line (“And there was evening …”), which begins with the same two first
letters (). This is called haplography.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And God said, “Let the earth generate plants, vegetation that produces
seed, fruit trees, each making fruit of its own kind, which has its seed
in it, on the earth. And it was so:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² The earth brought out plants, vegetation that produces seeds of its
own kind, and trees that make fruit that each has seeds of its own kind
in it. And God saw that it was good.

---

Footnote 1:12. vegetation that produces seeds of its own kind. The fact that
plants (and, later, animals) not only reproduce but also propagate
offspring like themselves, rather than random production of new
life-forms, is not taken for granted. It is treated as both fundamental
and a wonder of life, which needed an explicit creative utterance by the
deity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And there was evening, and there was morning: a third day.

---

Footnote 1:13. third day. On the third day the divine attention turns from the
cosmos to the world: first land, then the vegetation that the land
yields. On the fourth day the attention turns back to the skies: the
creation of lights in the sky. The alternation between skies and earth
continues as the deity turns back to the earth on the fifth day. This
conveys that the earth and the skies are not conceptually separate.
Understanding the nature of the universe is essential to understanding
our place as humans on earth. We have especially come to realize this
through the discoveries in astronomy and physics of the last century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And God said, “Let there be lights in the space of the skies to
distinguish between the day and the night, and they will be for signs
and for appointed times and for days and years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And they will be for lights in the space of the skies to shed light on
the earth.” And it was so.

---

Footnote 1:15. they will be for lights in the space. Note that daylight is not
understood here to derive from the sun. The text understands the light
that surrounds us in the daytime to be an independent creation of God,
which has already taken place on the first day. The sun, moon, and stars
are understood here to be light sources— like a lamp or torch, only
stronger. Their purpose is also to be markers of time: days, years,
appointed occasions.

This also implies an answer to an old question: People have questioned
whether the first three days are twenty-four-hour days since the sun is
not created until the fourth day. But light, day, and night are not
understood here to depend on the existence of the sun, so there is no
reason to think that the word “day” means anything different on the
first two days than what it means everywhere else in the Torah. People’s
reason for raising this is often to reconcile the biblical creation
story with current evidence on the earth’s age. But it is better to
recognize that the biblical story does not match the evidence than to
stretch the story’s plain meaning in order to make it fit better with
our current state of knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And God made the two big lights—the bigger light for the regulation of
the day and the smaller light for the regulation of the night—and the
stars.

---

Footnote 1:16. the bigger light. The sun.

Footnote 1:16. the smaller light. The moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And God set them in the space of the skies to shed light on the earth

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ and to regulate the day and the night and to distinguish between the
light and the darkness. And God saw that it was good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And there was evening, and there was morning: a fourth day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And God said, “Let the water swarm with a swarm of living beings, and
let birds fly over the earth on the face of the space of the skies.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And God created the big sea serpents and all the living beings that
creep, with which the water swarmed, by their kinds, and every winged
bird by its kind. And God saw that it was good.

---

Footnote 1:21. sea serpents. Hebrew tannî n. This is generally understood to
refer to some giant serpentlike creatures that were formed at creation
but later destroyed, associated with the monsters Rahab (Isa 51:9) or
Leviathan (Isa 27:1). Later, Aaron’s staff (and the Egyptian magicians’
staffs) turns into such a creature (not merely a snake!) at the Egyptian
court (Exod 7:9–12).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And God blessed them, saying, “Be fruitful and multiply and fill the
water in the seas, and let the birds multiply in the earth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And God said, “Let the earth bring out living beings by their kind,
domestic animal and creeping thing and wild animals of the earth by
their kind.” And it was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And God made the wild animals of the earth by their kind and the
domestic animals by their kind and every creeping thing of the ground by
their kind. And God saw that it was good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁶ And God said, “Let us make a human, in our image, according to our
likeness, and let them dominate the fish of the sea and the birds of the
skies and the domestic animals and all the earth and all the creeping
things that creep on the earth.”

---

Footnote 1:26. Let us make. Why does God speak in the plural here? Some take the
plural to be “the royal we” as used by royalty and the papacy among
humans, but this alone does not account for the fact that it occurs only
in the opening chapters of the Torah and nowhere else. Others take the
plural to mean that God is addressing a heavenly court of angels,
seraphim, or other heavenly creatures, although this, too, does not
explain the limitation of the phenomenon to the opening chapters. More
plausible, though by no means certain, is the suggestion that it is an
Israelite, monotheistic reflection of the pagan language of the divine
council. In pagan myth, the chief god, when formally speaking for the
council of the gods, speaks in the plural. Such language might be
appropriate for the opening chapters of the Torah, thus asserting that
the God of Israel has taken over this role.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:27

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁷ And God created the human in His image. He created it in the image of
God; He created them male and female.

---

Footnote 1:27. He. In the present age many people choose not to conceive of the
deity as male or female. In the Torah, however, there are passages in
which one cannot help but understand and translate a divine reference as
masculine. The Torah depicts God as male. Rather than impose a present
view on an ancient text, I feel bound to leave the masculine references
to the deity as they are, although I urge those who study the Torah to
contemplate what this has meant through the ages from the time of the
writing of the Torah to their own respective times.

Footnote 1:27. in the image of God. We argue but truly do not know what is meant:
whether a physical, spiritual, or intellectual image of God. (Some light
may be shed on this by Gen 5:3. See the comment there.) Whatever it
means, though, it implies that humans are understood here to share in
the divine in a way that a lion or cow does not. That is crucial to all
that will follow. The paradox, inherent in the divine-human
relationship, is that only humans have some element of the divine, and
only humans would, by their very nature, aspire to the divine, yet God
regularly communicates with them by means of commands. Although made in
the image of God, they remain subordinates. In biblical terms, that
would not bother a camel or a dove. It will bother humans a great deal.

Footnote 1:27. in the image of God; He created them male and female. Both men and
women are created in the divine image. If the physical image of God is
meant, it is difficult to say what is implied about the divine
appearance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:28

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁸ And God blessed them, and God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply
and fill the earth and subdue it and dominate the fish of the sea and
the birds of the skies and every animal that creeps on the earth.”

---

Footnote 1:28. Be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth. This commandment has
now been fulfilled.

Footnote 1:28. subdue it and dominate. Incredibly, some have interpreted this
command to mean that humans have permission to abuse the earth and
animal and plant life—as if a command from God to rule did not imply to
be a good ruler!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:29

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁹ And God said, “Here, I have placed all the vegetation that produces
seed that is on the face of all the earth for you and every tree, which
has in it the fruit of a tree producing seed. It will be food for you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:30

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁰ and for all the wild animals of the earth and for all the birds of the
skies and for all the creeping things on the earth, everything in which
there is a living being: every plant of vegetation, for food.” And it
was so.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 1:31

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³¹ And God saw everything that He had made, and, here, it was very good.
And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.

---

Footnote 1:31. everything that He had made, and, here, it was very good. The
initial state of creation is regarded as satisfactory. Things will soon
go wrong, but it is unclear if that means that the “good” initial state
becomes flawed, or if there is hope that the course of events will fit
into an ultimately good structure in “the length of days.” One of the
most remarkable results of having a sense of the Tanak as a whole when
one reads the parts is that one can experience the overwhelming irony of
God’s judging everything to be good in Genesis 1 when so much will go
wrong later. The deity notes on every working day that what was created
in that day is good (except on Monday, but it compensates, saying “God
saw that it was good” twice on Tuesday; see the comment on 1:10,12). And
at the end of the six days God observes that everything is very good.
But before we are even out of Parashat Bereshit we read that God begins
to see “that human bad was multiplied in the earth” (6:5). Above all,
the struggle between God and humans will recur and unfold powerfully and
painfully. The day in which the humans are created is declared to be
good, but this condition ends very soon. No biblical hero or heroine
will be unequivocally perfect. Individuals and nations, Israel and all
of humankind, will be pictured in conflict with the creator for the
great majority of the text that will follow. Parashat Bereshit is a
portent of this coming story, which is arguably the central story of the
Tanak, because its first chapter contains the creation of humans that is
divinely dubbed good, and its last verses contain the sad report that
God regrets making the humans in the earth (6:6ff.). Importantly
Parashat Bereshit ends not with the deity’s mournful statement that “I
regret that I made them” (6:7) but rather with a point of hope: that
Noah found favor in the divine sight (6:8). And this note, that there
can be hope for humankind based on the acts of righteous individuals, is
also a portent of the end of the story. In the last installment in the
narrative, the book of Nehemiah, God does not speak, there are no
extraordinary reports of miracles, no angels, dreams, talking animals,
or Urim and Tummim (see comment on Exod 28:30); but humans, now having
to live without these things, behave better and appear to be more
committed to the Torah than perhaps any other generation in the Bible.
(Nehemiah comes last in the Leningrad Codex, the oldest complete
manuscript of the entire Tanak. Printed editions of the Hebrew Bible
generally have the books of Chronicles last, but the story ends with
Nehemiah.) Nehemiah ends by asking his God to “Remember me for good”
(13:31). The fact that the Hebrew Bible’s story concludes with the word
“good” is an exquisite, hopeful bookend to the opening chapter of
Genesis, in which everything starts out being good.
