------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2

¹ And the skies and the earth and all their array were finished.

---

Footnote 2:1. the skies and the earth and all their array were finished. Attempts
to reconcile this seven-day creation story with evolution and geological
and cosmological evidence of the age of the universe are absurd,
requiring a twisting of the words of the text in ways they never
remotely meant. Arguments over whether the biblical or the scientific
picture is correct are pointless. Of course the biblical picture is not
a factual, literal account of the universe’s origin. The evidence to
this effect is overwhelming. It is, however, a meaningful, valuable,
instructive account: It conveys a particular conception of the
relationship between humans and the cosmos, of the relations between the
sexes, of the linear flow of time, of the Sabbath. It sets the Bible’s
story in a context of a universe that starts out as good, with God being
initially very close to humans. I have discussed the relationship among
creation in the Bible, creation in Kabbalah, and what we know of the
universe’s origin through science in The Hidden Face of God, chapters
10–12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And in the seventh day God finished His work that He had done and
ceased in the seventh day from all His work that He had done.

---

Footnote 2:2. the seventh day. The seven-day week is found in cultures around the
world, presumably because of the association with the sun, moon, and
five planets that are visible to the naked eye. Hence, the English
Sunday (Sun-day), Monday (Moon-day; cf. French lundi), and Saturday
(Saturn-day), and French mardi (Mars-day) and mercredi (Mercury-day). It
is fundamental to creation in the Torah, again relating the ordering of
time to the very essence of creation. The reckoning of days and years is
established by the creation of the sun and moon on the fifth day. The
reckoning of weeks is established by the very order of divine activity
in the creation itself. This may suggest that the week is given a
special status among units of time, and this appears to be confirmed by
the singular status given to the Sabbath. It is blessed by the creator,
sanctified, and later will be recognized among the Ten Commandments.

Footnote 2:2. ceased. The word (Hebrew ) means to “stop,” not to “rest” as
it is often taken. The explicit association of the Sabbath with rest
will come later, in the Ten Commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And God blessed the seventh day and made it holy because He ceased in
it from doing all His work, which God had created.

---

Footnote 2:3. made it holy. (Hebrew ) This word is commonly understood to
mean “separated,” in the sense of being set off from the usual, rather
than denoting a special spiritual or even mysterious quality, but there
really is little linguistic justification for that understanding.
Holiness in the Torah seems indeed to be a singular, powerful quality
that certain objects, places, and persons acquire. See comments on
Leviticus 19. It means much more than just “separate.”

Footnote 2:3. made it holy. What does it mean to make a day holy? The creation of
humans toward the end of the account is both a climax and, at the same
time, a small component of the universe. Their creation is not the
culmination of the story. The culmination, as the story is arranged, is
the Sabbath, a cosmic event: the deity at a halt and consummation. A. J.
Heschel wrote that the special significance of the concept of the
Sabbath is that it means the sanctification of time. Most other
religious symbols are spatial: sacred objects, sacred places, sacred
music, prayers, art, symbolic foods, gestures, and practices. But the
first thing in the Torah to be rendered holy is a unit in the passage of
time. This powerfully underscores the Torah’s character as containing
the first known works of history. In consecrating the passage of time in
weekly cycles, the institution of the Sabbath at the end of the creation
account in Genesis 1 is itself a notable union of the cosmic/cyclical
and the historical/linear flow of time. It sets all of the Bible’s
coming accounts of history in a cosmic structure of time, just as the
story of the creation of the universe in that chapter sets the rest of
the Bible’s stories in a cosmic structure of space. Thus Genesis 1 is a
story of the fashioning of a great orderly universe out of chaos in
which everything fits into an organized temporal and spatial structure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ These are the records of the skies and the earth when they were
created: In the day that YHWH God made earth and skies

---

Footnote 2:4. These are the records. A second account of creation starts here.
What is the relationship of the two creation accounts: In the
scholarship of recent centuries, the two creation stories have come to
be attributed to different authors. On this and other matters of
authorship, see my Who Wrote the Bible? There I addressed the story of
how the Torah came to be written, and I identified the source texts that
were combined to form it. I concluded that the combination of those
texts produced a Torah that is greater than the sum of its parts. In
this commentary I am more concerned with the point at which Who Wrote
the Bible? leaves off: with the final product of centuries of history
and composition, which came to be known and cherished as the Torah. In
the case of the creation story, the combination of the from-the-sky-down
and the from-the-earth-up accounts produces a much richer and much more
whole conception of creation than we would have if there were only one
account. Also, placing the cosmic conception first creates the
impression of the wide camera view narrowing in. This feeling of
narrowing in will continue through the coming stories, contributing to
the rich-in-background feeling that will persist through the rest of the
Bible.

Footnote 2:4. records. This word has commonly been understood to mean
“generations,” but that translation is inadequate. The word is used both
to introduce records of births (as in Gen 5:1) and to introduce stories
of events within a family (as in Gen 37:2). (Its root meaning is “to
give birth,” but it acquired a much broader sense. Its broadest meaning
is here in its first occurrence in the Torah, where it refers to the
skies and earth and introduces the story of the early events of
creation.) It thus means historical records, and usually family records.

This verse is sometimes taken to be the conclusion of the preceding
seven-day account. That is wrong. The phrase “These are the records”
always introduces a list or story. It is used ten more times in Genesis
to construct the book as continuous narrative through history rather
than as a loose collection of stories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

—⁵ when all produce of the field had not yet been in the earth, and all
vegetation of the field had not yet grown, for YHWH God had not rained
on the earth, and there had been no human to work the ground,

---

Footnote 2:5. not yet. The word for “not yet,” Hebrew erem, occurs twice
in this verse, followed by the explanation that God has not “rained,”
Hebrew himir, on the earth. This kind of pun, based on
rearrangement of root letters (metathesis), occurs frequently. This
story is riddled with puns. They convey right from the beginning that
the elegance of the Torah’s wording is important even while it imparts
important content. One might say: even though the ideas here could stand
on their own feet, they are given chariots of gold in which to ride.
Also, since puns are untranslatable, their presence here urges us all to
learn to read the Torah in Hebrew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ and a river had come up from the earth and watered the whole face of
the ground—

---

Footnote 2:6. a river. The Hebrew word, ’d is probably related to Sumerian
ID, which means a river, rather than meaning a mist, as it has
frequently been understood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ YHWH God fashioned a human, dust from the ground, and blew into his
nostrils the breath of life, and the human became a living being.

---

Footnote 2:7. human. Hebrew ’dm. As in Gen 1:26, the word refers to
the species, not to the male of the species. The word “man” (Hebrew
) is not used until after the formation of woman (2:23), which
implies that a sexual identification is meaningless so long as there is
only one being. This may in turn imply something about the sexual
identification of the deity in monotheism. On one hand, God is regularly
identified with masculine verbs and adjectives and has a masculine name.
(See the comment on Gen 1:26.) On the other hand, what is the meaning of
a sexual distinction when there is only one of something?! As in many
other matters relating to God in the Tanak, the hiddenness of the deity
leaves this question unanswerable. The ancient Israelites themselves
were at least as uncertain about this as people in subsequent ages, for
there were times when they conceived of their God as having a female
consort. Thus the prophet Jeremiah criticizes the people for including
“the Queen of the skies” in their worship (Jer 44:17ff.). And an
inscription that was excavated at Quntillet Ajrud refers to “YHWH and
His Asherah.”

Footnote 2:7. a human, dust from the ground. A pun: The word for human in Hebrew
is ’dm (sometimes translated in English as “Adam”), and
the story reports that he is formed from the ground (Hebrew
’dmh). And this in turn began with a river
(’d) coming up. So we have in vv. 6–7 the sequence .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And YHWH God planted a garden in Eden at the east, and He set the human
whom He had fashioned there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And YHWH God caused every tree that was pleasant to the sight and good
for eating to grow from the ground, and the tree of life within the
garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and bad.

---

Footnote 2:9. tree of life. Ancient Israelites believed in an afterlife, but it
will not come up in the Torah until later. It is not part of the
creation account. Even in the combined picture of the two parts of the
creation account there is no reference whatever to the creation of a
realm for afterlife—no heaven or hell. On the contrary, there is a tree
of life in the garden which enables one to live forever. Humans are not
forbidden to eat from this tree. (Only the tree of knowledge of good and
bad is prohibited.) So death, life after death, heaven and hell, eternal
reward and punishment are not yet elements of the account. After the
humans are expelled from the garden and thus cut off from the tree of
life, death will enter the story. But there still will be no account of
the establishment of any realm of afterlife.

Footnote 2:9. tree of knowledge of good and bad. Not good and “evil,” as this is
usually understood and translated. “Evil” suggests that this is strictly
moral knowledge. But the Hebrew word (r‘) has a much wider range
of meaning than that. This may mean knowledge of what is morally good
and bad, or it may mean qualities of good and bad in all realms:
morality, aesthetics, utility, pleasure and pain, and so on. It may mean
that things are good or bad in themselves and that when one eats from
the tree one acquires the ability to see these qualities; or it may mean
that when one eats from the tree one acquires the ability to make
judgments of good and bad. Perhaps the meaning was clear to the ancient
reader who knew the immediate connotations of the words. It is not clear
to us in the text of the story as it has survived. The only immediate
consequence of eating from the tree that the story names is that before
eating from the tree the humans are not embarrassed over nudity and
after eating from it they are. This is not sufficient information to
tell us what limits of “good and bad” are meant, nor does it tell us if
absolute good and bad are implied or if it is the more relative concept
of making judgments of good and bad. The wording, “the eyes of the two
of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked,” may imply
awareness of an absolute value. On the other hand, great numbers of
commandments, as articulated in later accounts in Genesis and especially
in the following four books of the Bible, suggest that few things are
treated as good or bad acts in themselves in these texts. Rather, there
is only that which God commands or God prohibits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And a river was going out from Eden to water the garden, and it was
dispersed from there and became four heads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ The name of one was Pishon; that is the one that circles all the land
of Havilah where there is gold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And that land’s gold is good; bdellium and onyx stone are there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And the name of the second river is Gihon; that is the one that
circles all the land of Cush.

---

Footnote 2:13. Gihon. The name is a pun, because later the snake will be cursed
that it (and all snakes) must crawl on its “belly,” which in Hebrew is
gn (Gen 3:14). The names of the other rivers may
contain puns as well, for the letters of Euphrates (Hebrew )
occur in the next words of the snake’s curse: ; Pishon (Hebrew
) contains the same root letters as the word that describes the
human’s becoming “a living being” (Hebrew ); and the letters of
Tigris (Hebrew ) occur in a similar jumble (a metathesis) at the
end of the story:  (3:22). So the rivers that all derive from
Eden both convey geography and hint at the coming events there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And the name of the third river is Tigris; that is the one that goes
east of Assyria. And the fourth river: that is Euphrates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And YHWH God took the human and put him in the garden of Eden to work
it and to watch over it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And YHWH God commanded the human, saying, “You may eat from every tree
of the garden.

---

Footnote 2:16. every tree of the garden but from the tree of knowledge of good
and bad. Only the tree of knowledge of good and bad is forbidden. The
tree of life is not forbidden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ But from the tree of knowledge of good and bad: you shall not eat from
it, because in the day you eat from it: you’ll die!”

---

Footnote 2:17. in the day you eat from it: you’ll die! On first reading, most
readers take this to mean that one’s death will occur in the very day
that one eats from the tree. In the absence of punctuation in the Hebrew
text, however, one cannot be certain. Before eating from the tree of
knowledge, humans have access to the tree of life and therefore can live
forever. This verse may mean that in the day that humans eat from the
tree of knowledge they become mortal, in the sense of: “If you stay away
from it, you’ll live; in the day you eat from it, you’ll die.” This
general meaning of the expression “In the day you do you’ll die” occurs
elsewhere (1 Kings 2:37,42); and this is what in fact occurs in the
story here.

Alternatively, if it does in fact mean that their death will occur in
the very day that they eat from the tree, then we must understand what
subsequently occurs to be a divine act of mercy or relenting: they do
not die immediately but are rendered mortal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And YHWH God said, “It’s not good for the human to be by himself. I’ll
make for him a strength corresponding to him.”

---

Footnote 2:18. a strength corresponding to him. Woman is usually understood to be
created as a suitable “helper” (Hebrew ‘zer) to man in this
account. The Hebrew root, however, can also mean “strength.” (This was
first proposed by R. D. Freedman. See cases of ‘zer in parallel
with ‘z, another word for “strength,” as in, for example, Ps

Footnote 46:2. See also Azariah [2 Kings 14:21] and Uzziah [2 Chron 26:1] as
alternative names of the same king.) The Hebrew phrase ‘zer
knegdô therefore may very well mean “a corresponding strength.”
If so, it is a different picture from what people have thought, and an
intriguing one in terms of recently developed sensitivities concerning
the sexes and how they are pictured in the Torah. In Genesis 1, man and
woman are both created in the image of God; in Genesis 2, they are
corresponding strengths. However one interprets subsequent stories and
laws in the Torah, this essential equality of worth and standing
introduces them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And YHWH God fashioned from the ground every animal of the field and
every bird of the skies and brought it to the human to see what he would
call it. And whatever the human would call it, each living being, that
would be its name.

---

Footnote 2:19. animal of the field. This phrase refers to wild animals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And the human gave names to every domestic animal and bird of the
skies and every animal of the field. But He did not find for the human a
strength corresponding to him.

---

Footnote 2:20. the human gave names. The human, who is created in the image of
the creator, is now given a function that the creator performed in
Genesis 1: bestowing names on parts of the creation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And YHWH God caused a slumber to descend on the human, and he slept.
And He took one of his ribs and closed flesh in its place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And YHWH God built the rib that He had taken from the human into a
woman and brought her to the human.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And the human said, “This time is it: bone from my bones and flesh
from my flesh. This will be called woman,’ for this one was taken from
‘man.’”

---

Footnote 2:23. bone from my bones and flesh from my flesh. In addition to its
literal meaning in this case—the woman is formed from the bone of the
man—this expression has the figurative meaning of persons belonging to
one another. It has this latter meaning in biblical episodes to come
(Gen 29:14; Judg 9:2; 2 Sam 5:1 = 1 Chron 11:1; 2 Sam 19:13–14).

Footnote 2:23. will be called ‘woman,’ for this one was taken from ‘man.’ The
Septuagint and Samaritan read “her man” (Hebrew ), which makes
the pun better, and that reading avoids both the grammatical problem and
the social problem that Hebrew  is not in fact the feminine of
Hebrew . (Its root is  and is related to Hebrew
’enš.) It also makes a better parallel to the coming reference in
3:20 to “his woman.”

Footnote 2:23. man. Now, after woman has been formed, the word “man” occurs for
the first time instead of “human.” Sexual distinction has no meaning
unless there are two or more kinds of a species, so there is no male
until there is a female.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ On account of this a man leaves his father and his mother and clings
to his woman, and they become one flesh.

---

Footnote 2:24. On account of this … This is understood to be more than the story
of two individuals. The acts of the first two humans are presented as
having implications for the character and destiny of all their
descendants. This fact is established here, prior to the events
surrounding the tree of knowledge, so that it will be clear that the
consequences of those events will be the fate of all humankind.

Footnote 2:24. and clings to his woman, and they become one flesh. This may be
taken as the origin of marriage or of sexual union or both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 2:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And the two of them were naked, the human and his woman, and they were
not embarrassed.

---

Footnote 2:25. his woman. The use of the word “his” may or may not imply
possession of the woman or some dominant role for the male, because the
text refers a few verses later to “her man” (3:6). Also, men’s
domination of women is pictured in this story as deriving from God’s
decree on woman after the episode of the tree of knowledge of good and
bad, which has not yet occurred at this point.
