------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

3

¹ And the snake was slier than every animal of the field that YHWH God
had made, and he said to the woman, “Has God indeed said you may not eat
from any tree of the garden?”

---

Footnote 3:1. slier. A pun: The snake is introduced as the most “sly”
(rm) of the animals (3:1). In the subsequent dialogue
between God and the man, the man says, after eating from the tree, that
he is ‘êrm, naked. His condition is spelled with the same
consonants as the snake’s characteristic. The paronomasia may be purely
a play on the root letters. Or it may be a pun of content, since the man
now uses the word ‘êrm when he is in fact no longer naked but is
attempting, like the snake, to mislead.

Footnote 3:1. Has God indeed said you may not eat from any tree of the garden? A
confusing formulation, conceivably to throw the woman off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And the woman said to the snake, “We may eat from the fruit of the
trees of the garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ But from the fruit of the tree that is within the garden God has said,
“You shall not eat from it, and you shall not touch it, or else you’ll
die.”

---

Footnote 3:3. and you shall not touch it. But God is not reported to have said
that they could not touch it (2:17). As Rashi notes, the dialogue
appears to develop the principle that if one starts out by adding to a
command one may come to take away from it in the end. We should also
note that this principle is already introduced here at the beginning of
the Torah, because it is an essential principle that Moses pronounces
twice near the end of the Torah: “You shall not add to the thing that I
command you, and you shall not take away from it” (Deut 4:2; 13:1).

Moreover: God is not quoted as having given any instruction to the
woman. The natural understanding is that she has learned it from the
man. So it may suggest that he adds it to protect himself (or her), or
that she adds it herself. Either way, it is a caution concerning human
oral transmission of a divine command.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And the snake said to the woman, “You won’t die!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ Because God knows that in the day you eat from it your eyes will be
opened, and you’ll be like God—knowing good and bad.”

---

Footnote 3:5. you’ll be like God. Whatever is meant by creation in the image of
God, it means that humans are understood to participate in the divine in
some way that animals do not. Only humans would aspire to the divine.
And that is the basis of the snake’s appeal to the humans here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And the woman saw that the tree was good for eating and that it was an
attraction to the eyes, and the tree was desirable to bring about
understanding, and she took some of its fruit, and she ate, and gave to
her man with her as well, and he ate.

---

Footnote 3:6. its fruit. The text does not say what kind of fruit. Rashi,
following the Talmud (Sanhedrin 70b), suggested figs, so that it is
ironic that they then cover themselves with fig leaves. Artists
traditionally make it an apple. I have also heard pomegranate, citron
(Hebrew ’etrog), and wheat! I think it is meaningful that the text does
not tell us what it is. This may suggest that it is a unique fruit, the
fruit of this unique tree. Or it may convey that the kind of fruit is
not mentioned because that is not the point. In its extraordinary
economy of detail, the Torah gives us only what is crucial to the story.
What matters is not whether the fruit is a grape or a banana—but that it
is forbidden, that it gives one the knowledge of good and bad, and that
the humans are attracted to take it. The kind of fruit is of concern
only for picturing this story in art. My daughter Jesse, when she was
nine years old, painted a picture of this story, and she made all
different fruits grow from this same tree.

Footnote 3:6. gave to her man with her. People frequently have claimed that this
story blames the woman for persuading, enticing, or seducing the man to
eat the fruit. But there is no reference to any act of persuasion.
Indeed, the words “her man with her” may suggest that he should be
pictured as having been there while the snake was speaking to her. And
even the deity’s words later—”you listened to your woman’s voice”
(3:17)—need not suggest seduction or persuasion on her part. They merely
respond to the man’s having tried to shift blame to her, and they affirm
that he must bear the consequences of his own actions. Moreover, the
snake speaks with plural verbs, suggesting that he is including the man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And the eyes of the two of them were opened, and they knew that they
were naked. And they picked fig leaves and made loincloths for
themselves.

---

Footnote 3:7. they picked fig leaves and made loincloths. Humans do not yet
fashion or invent anything new themselves. They do not actually make
clothing. They only cover themselves with leaves. The first clothing is
made by God (3:21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And they heard the sound of YHWH God walking in the garden in the wind
of the day and the human and his woman hid from YHWH God among the
garden’s trees.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And YHWH God called the human and said to him, “Where are you?”

---

Footnote 3:9. Where are you? The conversation between God and the two humans in
the garden is a masterpiece. God says, “Where are you?” (a strange thing
for a deity to say). The man answers, “I hid because I was naked,” and
his creator pounces like an attorney who has caught a witness in a
stupid mistake on the stand: “Who told you that you were naked?! Have
you eaten from the tree …?” To which the man replies, unchivalrously,
“The WOMAN,” and ungratefully, “whom YOU placed with me,” and trying to
escape responsibility for his own actions: “SHE gave me from the tree,
and I ate.” The creator turns to the woman, who also tries to pass the
responsibility down the line: “The SNAKE tricked me.” God pronounces a
curse on the snake (and on all snakes)—no dialogue, there’s no one left
for the snake to blame—but then God turns back to the woman and
pronounces a painful fate for her (and all women) as well. During this
pronouncement one should consider the tension in the man, who does not
know if the pendulum of recompense will swing all the way back to him.
Did his blaming the woman excuse him? Clearly not, as YHWH next turns
back to the man and says, “Because YOU listened …” and pronounces a hard
fate for him (and all men) as well. This first divine-human dialogue in
the Torah is remarkable—at times humorous and at times fearfully
serious—but the point is not merely a literary one; it is a
psychological one (showing the sexes reacting to guilt and fear) and a
spiritual one (showing divine-human confrontation) as well. This
exchange is a powerful introduction to the coming account of the
relationship between God and humans in the Torah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And he said, “I heard the sound of you in the garden and was afraid
because I was naked, and I hid.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And He said, “Who told you that you were naked? Have you eaten from
the tree from which I commanded you not to eat?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And the human said, “The woman, whom you placed with me, she gave me
from the tree, and I ate.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And YHWH God said to the woman, “What is this that you’ve done?”

And the woman said, “The snake tricked me, and I ate.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And YHWH God said to the snake, “Because you did this, you are cursed
out of every domestic animal and every animal of the field, you’ll go on
your belly, and you’ll eat dust all the days of your life.

---

Footnote 3:14. the snake. Just a snake, not the devil or Satan as later Christian
interpretation pictured. As the curse that follows indicates, this story
has to do with the fate of snakes, not with the cosmic role of a devil.
There is no such concept in the Hebrew Bible.

Footnote 3:14. you’ll go on your belly. Scholars often refer to the “economy” of
wording in biblical stories, but even by the Bible’s obviously
economical standard the story of Eden stands out as a showpiece for
accomplishing so much in just twenty-four verses. Stories in Genesis
frequently develop etiologies—explanations of the origins of names and
practices—but none comes close to the number of origins accounted for in
Genesis 3. Namely:

1.  It is the story of why snakes do not have legs. Contrary to the vast
    majority of depictions of this story in art—which have the snake
    coiled around the tree while addressing the woman—the text states
    explicitly in v. 14 that the fact that snakes crawl on their bellies
    is the punishment imposed on the snake (and its descendants) for the
    offense that it has committed. Before v. 14 the snake must be
    pictured as having legs.
2.  The story is the etiology of what was perceived to be the natural
    enmity between humans and snakes (v. 15). Presumably, the human
    phobia even of harmless snakes was as common at the time of this
    story’s composition as it is to this day.
3.  It is the etiology of man’s domination of woman in the world in
    which this story was composed (v. 16).
4.  It is the author’s etiology of woman’s being drawn to man (v. 16),
    and:
5.  man’s mating with woman (“On account of this a man leaves his father
    and his mother and clings to his woman, and they become one flesh,”
    2:24).
6.  The story contains the etiologies of clothing (and embarrassment
    over nudity), 2:25; 3:7,10–11,21;
7.  labor pain in childbirth (v. 16);
8.  work (vv. 17–19);
9.  knowledge of good and bad;
10. death. The humans have access to the tree of life initially, which
    would make them immortal (v. 22). They are denied only the tree of
    knowledge of good and bad. It is as a result of eating from the tree
    of knowledge that they lose access to the tree of life. They are
    driven from the garden of Eden, in which the tree of life is
    located, and cherubs and a flaming sword bar the way back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And I’ll put enmity between you and the woman and between your seed
and her seed. He’ll strike you at the head, and you’ll strike him at the
heel.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ To the woman He said, “I’ll make your suffering and your labor pain
great. You’ll have children in pain. And your desire will be for your
man, and he’ll dominate you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And to the human He said, “Because you listened to your woman’s voice
and ate from the tree about which I commanded you saying, ‘You shall not
eat from it,’ the ground is cursed on your account. You’ll eat from it
with suffering all the days of your life.

---

Footnote 3:17. the ground is cursed on your account. As a consequence of human
behavior, the environment suffers. This phenomenon will recur in the
Torah. See the comment on 4:11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And it will grow thorn and thistle at you, and you’ll eat the field’s
vegetation.

---

Footnote 3:18. thorn and thistle. The environment now becomes hostile to humans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ By the sweat of your nostrils you’ll eat bread until you go back to
the ground, because you were taken from it; because you are dust and
you’ll go back to dust.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And the human called his woman “Eve,” because she was mother of all
living.

---

Footnote 3:20. Eve. Hebrew hawwh, the feminine form of the word for “life”
(hay). Interestingly, this Semitic root elsewhere can mean snake! Again,
the story is replete with puns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And YHWH God made skin garments for the human and his woman and
dressed them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And YHWH God said, “Here, the human has become like one of us, to know
good and bad. And now, in case he’ll put out his hand and take from the
tree of life as well, and eat and live forever:”

---

Footnote 3:22. to know good and bad. Together with the artistry of language
(punning, dialogue) and the etiologies, the story merges insight into
the human condition. Like the Greek myth of Prometheus, the first story
of the Bible develops the notion that knowledge is a prize taken from
the divine realm and that the price for this forbidden prize is
suffering. What is particular to the Bible’s story is the kind of
knowledge that is at stake: knowledge of good and bad. As to what that
means, see the comment on Gen 2:9.

Footnote 3:22. put out. The text plays on forms of the verb : rather than
“put out” his hand (v. 22) the human is “put out” of the garden (v. 23).

Footnote 3:22. tree of life. The comparative literature is intriguing. In the
ancient Near Eastern epic of Gilgamesh, the hero, seeking immortality,
goes to the bottom of deep waters and brings up a plant that is supposed
to have the power to rejuvenate life. (If one eats from it, one becomes
young again.) While he goes off to bathe, however, a snake steals away
this “tree of life;” and this is the etiology of snakes’ sloughing their
skin and being rejuvenated (Gilgamesh, Tablet XII, lines 263–289).

Footnote 3:22. and eat and live forever. The fact that there is no mention of
afterlife being created at the time that death begins, in Genesis 3, is
very suggestive. See the comment on Gen 2:9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And YHWH God put him out of the garden of Eden, to work the ground
from which he was taken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 3:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And He expelled the human, and He had the cherubs and the flame of a
revolving sword reside at the east of the garden of Eden to watch over
the way to the tree of life.

---

Footnote 3:24. cherubs. Sphinxes. Creatures of mixed species, frequently with the
head of a human, the body of a four-legged animal, and the wings of a
bird. Cherubs guard the path to the tree of life. Later, statues of
cherubs will be placed over the ark, seemingly guarding its contents,
which are sources of wisdom and righteousness, which in turn are
pictured as ultimately the key to a return to the closeness with the
deity that is lost here (Prov 3:18; 11:30; see my The Hidden Face of
God, pp. 115–116).
