------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

6

¹ And it was when humankind began to multiply on the face of the ground
and daughters were born to them:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² and the sons of God saw the daughters of humankind, that they were
attractive, and they took women, from all they chose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And YHWH said, “My spirit won’t stay in humankind forever, since
they’re also flesh; and their days shall be a hundred twenty years.”

---

Footnote 6:3. My spirit won’t stay in humankind forever. Meaning: humans will not
live forever.

Footnote 6:3. their days shall be a hundred twenty years. God sets a maximum of
120 years for a human life. The reduction takes place gradually from a
peak in the 900s (Methuselah and Noah) to ages in the 100s for the
patriarchs. At the end of the Torah, Moses is said to have lived the
full 120 years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ The Nephilim were in the earth in those days and after that as well,
when the sons of God came to the daughters of humankind, and they gave
birth by them. They were the heroes who were of old, people of renown.

---

Footnote 6:4. Nephilim. Some Bible stories are virtually self-contained. Even
though they may have implications elsewhere in the Tanak, we can still
read them as sensible, comprehensible individual units. But this account
of the giants is an example of another type of story: those whose
elements are widely separated, distributed across great stretches of the
narrative. These stories provide the connections that make the Tanak a
united work, telling a continuous story, rather than a patchwork of
little tales.

The issue is that there are giants: uncommonly big, powerful persons,
who are frightening. The first question is: from where did they come?
Answer: “bnê ’lhîm” have relations with human
women, and they give birth to giants, Nephilim. Whatever the biblical
author thought bnê ‘lhîm were, we can say at
minimum that it refers here to some sort of (male) creatures from the
divine realm (see my comment on Deut 32:8). As in an extremely common
mythological theme, such mixed divine-human breeding produces beings who
are bigger and stronger than regular humans.

This does not come up again in the story until thousands of years later.
When Moses sends men to scout the promised land, they see the giants:
“the Nephilim” (Num 13:33). That is what scares the scouts, and their
fear infects the Israelites, changing the destiny of the wilderness
generation. A generation later, Joshua eliminates all the giants from
the land except from the Philistine cities, particularly the city of
Gath (Josh 11:21–22). And later still, the most famous Philistine giant,
Goliath, comes from Gath (1 Sam 17:4). And David defeats him.

We can read each of these stories without noticing that they are a
connected account, building to a climactic scene, but obviously we miss
something that way. Such widely distributed stories are there because
the Bible is not a loose collection of stories. It is an intricate,
elegant, exquisite, long work with continuity and coherence. When we
know our Bible well, we read this story about the giants in creation,
and we are aware that they will play a part in the tragedy of the
wilderness generation, that Joshua will defeat them, and that David will
face the most famous (and last?) of them.

This episode, coming at the end of the first parashah of the year, is a
reminder that one cannot really learn the Torah without learning the
rest of the Tanak as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And YHWH saw that human bad was multiplied in the earth, and every
inclination of their heart’s thoughts was only bad all the day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And YHWH regretted that He had made humankind in the earth.

And He was grieved to His heart.

---

Footnote 6:6. And YHWH regretted. What could this mean? If God knows the future,
how could God regret something once it has happened? Compare what the
prophet Samuel says about God: “He’s not a human that He should regret”
(1 Sam 15:29); yet it says twice in that same chapter that God does
regret making Saul the king of Israel (15:11,35)! This word is commonly
understood to mean “repented,” especially when referring to human
beings, but the question still remains what it would mean for God. The
problem may be more linguistic than theological, as a result of a lack
of a satisfactory word in English to capture the wider range of the
Hebrew word. It refers to a change of heart or making a reversal of
direction. The nature of this change may vary according to the
situation, so that it may mean “repent” or “regret” or “relent,” and in
biblical terms it may apply to either God or humans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And YHWH said, “I’ll wipe out the human whom I’ve created from the face
of the earth, from human to animal to creeping thing, and to the bird of
the skies, because I regret that I made them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ But Noah had found favor in YHWH’s eyes.

---

Footnote 6:8. Noah found favor. Parashat Bereshit ends not with the deity’s
mournful statement that “I regret that I made them” (6:7) but rather
with a point of hope: that Noah found favor in the divine sight.

Footnote 6:8. Noah found favor. Note the artistry: This is the beginning of a
chain of wordplay on the name Noah, as its two strong root letters, N
and guttural , recur frequently:

 

“This one will comfort us” (5:29)
yNamn

“He regretted” (6:6) wayyiNNem

“I regret” (6:7) Niamtî

“Noah found favor” (6:8) Na m’
HN

“And the ark rested” (8:4) wattNa

“pleasant smell” (8:21) Nî a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOAH

⁹ These are the records of Noah: Noah was a virtuous man. He was
unblemished in his generations. Noah walked with God.

---

Footnote 6:9. unblemished in his generations. Is it not redundant to say “in his
generations”? When else could he have lived?! The classic rabbinic
interpretation of this is two-sided. It can be taken to his credit: that
he could be good even in so corrupt an era. Or it can be taken as
diminishing his credit: that he is good only in comparison to his
corrupt era, but that he would appear less outstanding in a more moral
generation. But really the word here means “without a blemish.” It is
used elsewhere to refer to a sacrificial animal, which can have no
injury or else it would be disqualified for sacrifice. There are no
degrees of “unblemished.” One either is unblemished or is not. So the
words “in his generations” do not diminish this. Noah’s virtue is being
established here. And it is important that a story composed by Jews
emphasized the virtue of someone who is not a Jew—and who is the father
of all people. (A related term is used to describe Job, another virtuous
man who is not a Jew; see Job 1:8; 2:3.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And Noah fathered three sons: Shem, Ham, and Yaphet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And the earth was corrupted before God, and the earth was filled with
violence.

---

Footnote 6:11. the earth was corrupted. The Hebrew word, ‘eres, can mean “land”
or “earth.” Here it refers to all the earth but still applies just to
the dry land, and not the sea. (Cf. Exod 8:20.) That is why there will
be no destruction of sea creatures. It is the land that will disappear,
and land creatures that will die.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And God saw the earth; and, here, it was corrupted, because all flesh
had corrupted its way on the earth.

---

Footnote 6:12. all flesh had corrupted its way. All animal life, not just humans.

Footnote 6:12. on the earth. Land animals, not sea creatures. Sadly, in the
current era, we are corrupting the sea (and the sky, and space) as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And God said to Noah, “The end of all flesh has come before me,
because the earth is filled with violence because of them. And here: I’m
destroying them with the earth.

---

Footnote 6:13. destroying. The word in Hebrew, mašîtm, has the same
root meaning as the word for what all flesh have done in the preceding
verse: corrupted, Hebrew hišît. The same pun is used in Moses’
description of the golden calf event (Deut 9:12,26). This is not just
wordplay for its own sake. It conveys the principle that punishment is
meant to be in proportion to the crime. It also shows once again the
environment suffering because of human corruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ Make yourself an ark of gopher wood, make rooms with the ark, and
pitch it outside and inside with pitch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And this is how you shall make it: three hundred cubits the length of
the ark, fifty cubits its width, and thirty cubits its height.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ You shall make a window for the ark, and you shall finish it to a
cubit from the top, and you shall make the ark’s entrance in its side.
You shall make lower, second, and third stories for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And I, here: I’m bringing the flood, water on the earth, to destroy
all flesh in which is the breath of life from under the skies.
Everything that is in the earth will expire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And I shall establish my covenant with you. And you’ll come to the
ark, you and your sons and your wife and your sons’ wives with you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And of all the living, of all flesh, you shall bring two of each to
the ark to keep alive with you. They shall be male and female.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ Of the birds by their kind and of the domestic animals by their kind,
of all the creeping things of the ground by their kind, two of each will
come to you to keep alive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And you, take some of every food that will be eaten and gather it to
you, and it will be for you and for them for food.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 6:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And Noah did it. According to everything that God commanded him, he
did so.
