------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹ And YHWH said to Abram, “Go from your land and from your birthplace and
from your father’s house to the land that I’ll show you.

---

Footnote 12:1. Go. Hebrew lek lk. Much has been made of the second
word in this phrase, lk, which means “for you.” No
translation quite captures the sense of the Hebrew (“Go you,” “Get you,”
“Go for yourself”). The second element, lk (or
lkem), occasionally follows verbs in the Tanak. For example, in
Lev 26:1 we have l’ ta‘ lkem (you
shall not make for yourselves; you shall make you no …), and in Num
14:25 we have s‘ lkem (travel you; travel for
yourselves). I believe it is better to use no English term than to use
any of the possible equivalents, all of which are clumsy English and do
not convey the Hebrew.

Footnote 12:1. your land, your birthplace. But he is in Haran. He has already
left Ur of the Chaldeans, which was his land and birthplace. Rashi tries
to solve the problem by saying that this means “Go even farther from
your land and birthplace.” Ibn Ezra tries to solve it by saying that it
means “God had said [i.e., earlier, back in Ur], ‘Go from your land …’”
But these stretch the meaning of the Hebrew beyond what is possible. And
besides, Abraham later sends his servant to get a wife for Isaac,
saying, “Go to my land and my birthplace” (24:4), and the servant goes
to Haran (“to Aram Naharaim, to the city of Nahor,” 24:10; which is
identified as Haran, 27:43). On these grounds Ramban rejects Rashi’s and
Ibn Ezra’s solutions. Ramban’s own solution, though, falls short as
well, requiring that Abraham’s land and birthplace are Haran, not Ur.
This is further complicated by the fact that the Abrahamic covenant
begins with God saying to Abraham, “I brought you out of Ur …” (15:7).
The truth is that this is a case in which the contradiction is a result
of the fact that the Torah was composed from several sources. In this
case, one of its sources had Abraham coming from Ur, and another had him
coming from Haran. The aim of this commentary is to deal with the Torah
in its final, combined form and not to analyze its sources. (I have done
that elsewhere: in Who Wrote the Bible? and The Hidden Book in the
Bible.) Usually, the combination of sources has produced a richer, more
complex story in the Torah. But this passage is one of a few instances
in which the combination has produced an irreconcilable contradiction.
In such cases it is better to acknowledge the problem than to stretch to
make forced interpretations.

Footnote 12:1. your land, your birthplace, and your father’s house. But if he has
left his land, then of course he has left his birthplace and his
father’s house. This is geographically backwards. Therefore, the point
of this order is not geographical. It is emotional. The three steps are
arranged in ascending order of difficulty for Abraham. It is hard to
leave one’s land, harder if it is where one was born, and harder still
to leave one’s family. And where is he to go? To “the land that I’ll
show you.” That is, he must leave his homeland without knowing for what
he is giving it up. The wording seems designed to make it hard for
Abraham. This pattern of testing will be repeated when he is commanded
to sacrifice Isaac, thus: “Take your son, your only one, whom you love,
Isaac.” And where is he to sacrifice him? “On one of the mountains that
I’ll say to you.” (See the comment on 22:2.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And I’ll make you into a big nation, and I’ll bless you and make your
name great. And be a blessing!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And I’ll bless those who bless you, and those who affront you I’ll
curse. And all the families of the earth will be blessed through you.”

---

Footnote 12:3. all the families of the earth will be blessed through you. The
Tanak is so focused on the people of Israel that one can underestimate
the overwhelming significance of its opening section. The first eleven
chapters (Parashat Bereshit and Parashat Noah) are about the
relationship between God and the entire human community. That
relationship does not go well, and after ten generations the deity
decides to destroy the mass and start over with a single virtuous man’s
family. But it turns out that choosing a virtuous individual does not
guarantee that this individual’s descendants will be virtuous as well.
Another ten generations pass, and humans in general are not a
planet-full of Noahs. So once again the focus narrows to a single
virtuous person, Abraham. We must keep in mind what has happened up to
this point when we read this, or else we will lose the significance of
what is happening here. Wiping out everyone but a virtuous person did
not work. So God leaves the species alive but chooses an individual who
will produce a family that will ultimately bring blessing to all the
families of the earth.

To make sure we get it, it is the final point of God’s first revelation
to Abraham: Go to the land I’ll show you. I’ll make you a big nation.
I’ll bless you. “And all the families of the earth will be blessed
through you” (Gen 12:3).

To make sure we do not forget it, it is repeated four times—and always
in crucial moments of revelation: during the appearance of the three
visitors to Abraham (Gen 18:17–18); in the blessing following the
near-sacrifice of Isaac (22:16–18); in God’s first appearance to Isaac
(26:2–4); and in Jacob’s first encounter with God in the dream of the
ladder at Beth-El (28:10–14).

It is important. In some way, at some time, the result of the divine
choice of Abraham is supposed to be some good for all humankind. We are
never told what this good is supposed to be. Is it that Abraham’s
descendants are supposed to bring blessing by being “a light to the
nations”—setting an example, showing how a community can live: caring
for one another, not cheating one another, not enslaving one another,
not lending to each other for profit, and so on and on? Or is it that
they are to bring blessing by doing things that benefit the species:
inventions, cures, literature, music, learning? It does not say. But at
minimum it must mean that the people of Israel do not live alone or
apart. Their destiny—our destiny—whatever it is, must be bound up in the
destiny of all humankind.

This adds a dimension, an additional layer of significance, to every
story that will follow in the Torah. When Abraham travels to Canaan, we
might imagine it from a God’s-eye view above the earth: the tiny
movement of a man and his family along the globe is a first step in a
process that is to bring benefit for all the earth. When Abraham travels
to Egypt, this is the first in a series of encounters that he and his
descendants will have with the peoples of the world. When he and Lot are
forced to part, this is a step in distinguishing his destiny from that
of the families of his brothers Haran and Nahor, though he and his
descendants will continue to interact with them. When he joins in a
battle among kings in order to rescue Lot (Genesis 14), he is being
drawn into world events, and it is another first step, an anticipation
of all the times that his descendants, the people of Israel, will be
drawn into contact and interaction with nations. When Abraham covenants
with God (Genesis 15 and 17) the ceremony includes specific references
to Ur of the Chaldees, the land from which Abraham has come; to Egypt,
the land where his descendants will be enslaved; and to ten peoples of
the land that Abraham is promised. It also includes the announcement of
his coming son Isaac, the key to the fulfillment of the destiny to be a
blessing to all the families of the earth—as will be confirmed
explicitly following the Aqedah. And in between the two chapters
concerning the Abrahamic covenant comes the story of the birth of
Abraham’s son Ishmael, whose descendants, the Ishmaelites, will be among
Israel’s related neighbors.

All of these episodes are conveying the formative stages of a
development that begins with that narrowing of attention to Abraham. The
interpretive point is that we must understand every section of the Torah
with awareness of what has preceded it and what will come after it. The
social and moral point is that Abraham’s descendants are not to live by
themselves or only for themselves. Whether dealing with non-Jews who
live in Israel or dealing with non-Jews who are their neighbors in the
countries in which they reside, the Jews are a community that connects
its birth with a prediction (?), a promise (?), an obligation (?), a
destiny (?) to be a blessing to them all.

Footnote 12:3. will be blessed through you. Rashi takes the plain meaning of this
phrase to mean that non-Israelites will bless their children with words
such as “May you be like Abraham.” His proof for this reading is the
wording of Jacob’s blessing of his grandsons Ephraim and Manasseh:
“Israel will bless with you, saying: ‘May God make you like Ephraim and
Manasseh’” (Gen 48:20). But that passage uses an active form of the verb
(the Piel), whereas all the occurrences of this phrase in terms of the
nations being blessed use forms that are passive or reflexive (Niphal
and Hitpael), which is a different matter. If we take the meaning as
passive, then it is as I have translated it here: “the earth’s families
will be blessed through you.” If we take it as reflexive, then it can
mean “they will bless themselves through you,” which is Rashi’s
understanding; but a reflexive can also mean “they will get blessing
through you.” Interpreters are split on this. I believe that context
settles the question. The issue in the story until now has been the
course of relations between God and all the families of the earth. Now
God makes a special bond with Abraham’s family and lets him know that
this is for the eventual benefit of all families. (See the preceding
comment.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And Abram went as YHWH had spoken to him, and Lot went with him. And
Abram was seventy-five years old when he went out from Haran.

---

Footnote 12:4. Abram went as YHWH had spoken to him. Traditionally the emphasis
has been on faith as the mark of Abraham’s character. But the narrative
conveys far more that the mark of Abraham is obedience. Leave your land:
“And Abram went.” Sacrifice your son: “And Abram got up early.” The
tests that Abraham undergoes are not necessarily tests of faith but are
certainly tests of obedience. At this stage in relations between God and
humans, God appears to single out a human who will do what he is told.
This will change gradually in the Tanak, as humans grow and mature and
God cedes more responsibility for the world to them. But for now,
obedience is sought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And Abram took Sarai, his wife, and Lot, his brother’s son, and all
their property that they had accumulated and the persons whom they had
gotten in Haran; and they went out to go to the land of Canaan.

And they came to the land of Canaan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And Abram passed through the land as far as the place of Shechem, as
far as the oak of Moreh. And the Canaanite was in the land then.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And YHWH appeared to Abram and said, “I’ll give this land to your
seed.” And he built an altar there to YHWH who had appeared to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And he moved on from there to the hill country east of Beth-El and
pitched his tent—Beth-El to the west and Ai to the east—and he built an
altar there to YHWH and invoked the name YHWH.

---

Footnote 12:8. Beth-El to the west and Ai to the east. At this site, Abram
invokes the name YHWH for the first time, and he builds an altar there.
Later Abraham returns to this site and invokes the divine name again
(13:3). No explanation of the significance of this place between the two
cities—Beth-El and Ai—is given in the Torah. But we learn in the book of
Joshua that, many generations later, God delivers Ai into the
Israelites’ hands by means of an ambush, and it takes place “between
Beth-El and Ai, to the west of Ai” (Josh 8:9,12; cf. 12:9). This appears
to be a case of “the merit of the fathers.” That is, the pious acts of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have consequences for their descendants. In
this case, the Israelites are successful in the age of settlement of the
land thanks to what Abraham had done on the very spot centuries earlier.
There will be enough cases of this phenomenon to establish it as a major
theme and message of the Torah: that the good acts that we do have
implications for the lives of our children and many generations
thereafter: as an example, as a source of strength, and in subtle ways
that are impossible to calculate or foresee. This phenomenon of the
merit of the parents also acts as a preparation for and a balance to the
opposite phenomenon that will be developed in the Torah later: that our
sins are visited on the lives of our children and descendants as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And Abram traveled on, going to the Negeb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And there was a famine in the land, and Abram went down to Egypt to
reside there because the famine was heavy in the land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And it was when he was close to coming to Egypt: and he said to Sarai,
his wife, “Here, I know that you’re a beautiful woman.

12:11–13. Here, I know. Abraham’s words to Sarah contain the first two
occurrences of the Hebrew word na’. It is sometimes rendered “now” in
English and sometimes rendered “please.” But neither is quite right. It
is an untranslatable particle that is a sign of polite speech. Its most
striking occurrence is in God’s words to Abraham in the story of the
binding of Isaac: “Take na’ your son … and offer him” (Gen 22:2). I do
not translate it with any English word, because it is closer to the
Hebrew to use no word than to use such words as “please” or “now.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And it will be when the Egyptians see you that they’ll say, ‘This is
his wife,’ and they’ll kill me and keep you alive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ Say you’re my sister so it will be good for me on your account and
I’ll stay alive because of you.”

---

Footnote 12:13. Say you’re my sister … and I’ll stay alive. All commentators have
agonized over this. Abraham constructs a lie and puts Sarah in a
compromising position. This may mean that he thinks that he simply has
no real choice: it is either lie or die. Or it may convey that
Abraham—like other biblical heroes—is not perfect. We cannot know. In
either of these cases, he cannot be faulted for choosing to put Sarah in
a compromising position, because, in his understanding, Sarah would be
taken either way. The concern is that, without the lie, they would also
kill him. (In fact he turns out to be wrong. There is no evidence in the
Bible that the Egyptians or anyone else ever did what Abraham fears they
would do. Here and in two other cases in which Abraham and his son Isaac
claim that their wives are their sisters, the Egyptian and Philistine
kings send the couple away when they find out that she is his wife.)

Footnote 12:13. my sister. For a while it was common to cite tablets from Nuzi as
evidence that there was a Near Eastern practice of adopting one’s wife
as a sister. But the Nuzi case involved a single family, and scholars
recently have questioned whether it is justified to make so much of it.
Abraham’s actions here (and in Genesis 20; and Isaac’s actions in
Genesis 26) are treated as an unusual case. They require no Near Eastern
legal precedent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And it was as Abram came to Egypt, and the Egyptians saw the woman,
that she was very beautiful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And Pharaoh’s officers saw her and praised her to Pharaoh, and the
woman was taken to Pharaoh’s house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And he was good to Abram on her account, and he had a flock and oxen
and he-asses and servants and maids and she-asses and camels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ And YHWH plagued Pharaoh and his house, big plagues, over the matter
of Sarai, Abram’s wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And Pharaoh called Abram and said, “What is this you’ve done to me?
Why didn’t you tell me that she was your wife?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ Why did you say, ‘She’s my sister,’ so I took her for a wife for
myself! And now, here’s your wife. Take her and go.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 12:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And Pharaoh commanded people over him, and they let him and his wife
and all he had go.
