------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

22

¹ And it was after these things, and God tested Abraham.

And He said to him, “Abraham.”

And he said, “I’m here.”

---

Footnote 22:1. He said to him, “Abraham.” The Greek and Samaritan versions have
his name called twice here: “Abraham, Abraham.” This parallels the call
by the angel later (v. 11), by which Abraham is stopped from sacrificing
Isaac. Thus the instruction to sacrifice him and the instruction to hold
back are given equal weight. This also parallels the repetition of
Moses’ name in God’s first words to him at the burning bush (Exod 3:4)
and the repetition of Samuel’s name the first time God speaks to him (1
Sam 3:10). This appears to be a mark of divine communication at
significant moments in the biblical narrative. What stands out about
Abraham is that it comes here in the Aqedah rather than the first time
that God speaks to him. This marks the near-sacrifice as a defining
event in Abraham’s life and in the destiny of his descendants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And He said, “Take your son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac, and
go to the land of Mo-riah and make him a burnt offering there on one of
the mountains that I’ll say to you.”

---

Footnote 22:2. Take your son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac. If the issue
were only a matter of identification, just the name Isaac would have
been sufficient; but the issue, we are told explicitly in the first
verse of the story, is the test. The fourfold, heartrending
identification creates background for all that is to come. Now Abraham’s
unquestioning obedience is understood against this background: “your
son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac.” The otherwise minor temporal
note that “Abraham got up early in the morning” to do the deed becomes a
fact worthy of wonder and interpretation against the background of “your
son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac.” The notation that he puts the
wood for the sacrificial fire on Isaac himself to carry becomes an
ironic image. Abraham’s words to the servants who accompany them—”I and
the boy: we’ll go over there, and we’ll bow, and we’ll come back to
you”—become not only enigmatic but emotionally charged. (Does his saying
“we’ll come back” suggest extraordinary faith? one last hope? Or is it
constructed so as not to frighten Isaac?) The words of the dialogue
between the father and son become charged by this background as well, as
Isaac adds the phrase “my father” in his question addressed to Abraham,
and Abraham adds “my son” in each sentence in response. (The words “son”
and “father” occur twelve times in the story and are, in almost every
case, unnecessary for identification.) The dialogue moreover begins and
ends with the words “and the two of them went together,” another mundane
phrase turned into a remarkable one by what has preceded.

Most remarkable of all is the exchange between Abraham and Isaac over
the obvious absence of an animal to be sacrificed. Isaac says, “Here are
the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for the burnt offering?”
To appreciate the artistry of the wording of Abraham’s answer, we must
keep in mind that the Hebrew has no punctuation. The text says: “God
will see to the sheep for the burnt offering my son”—which can be
understood in two ways. The last two words can be read as a touching
epithet:

“God will see to the sheep for the burnt offering, my son.”

But they can also be read as a fearful irony:

“God will see to the sheep for the burnt offering: My son.”

—subtly conveying the truth that Isaac himself is to be the sheep for
the sacrifice.

And so the short passage, which like the entire chapter expresses no
emotions explicitly, reads like a tightly packed container whose
contents may burst in a moment:

        And the two of them went together.

        And Isaac said to Abraham his father; he said, “My father.”

        And he said, “I’m here, my son.”

        And he said, “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the
sheep for the burnt offering?”

        And Abraham said, “God will see to the sheep for the burnt
offering my son.” And the two of them went together.

The denouement of the story, in which Isaac is spared, is no less
charged by all of this expressed and unexpressed background. Indeed,
Abraham’s feelings (relief? gratitude? reverence? confusion?) are
likewise not a part of the narrative. There is rather a reminiscence of
the original wording, as God twice says to Abraham that now all is well
because “You didn’t hold back your son, your only one” (22:12,16; cf.
22:2). As biblical interpreters noted centuries ago, the wording
suggests that the reward at the end is in proportion to the difficulty
of the test as expressed at the beginning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And Abraham got up early in the morning and harnessed his ass and took
his two boys with him and Isaac, his son. And he cut the wood for the
burnt offering, and he got up and went to the place that God had said to
him.

---

Footnote 22:3. Abraham got up early in the morning. Abraham fights for the lives
of the people of Sodom and Gomorrah but not for the life of Isaac. That
is a strange fact itself, and then these two stories are juxtaposed by
being placed in the same parashah so that they are regularly read
together, which makes the ironic relationship between them even harder
to ignore. When God tells Abraham, “The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah: how
great it is. And their sin: how very heavy it is. Let me go down, and
I’ll see if they’ve done, all told, like the cry that has come to me.
And if not, let me know” (18:20–21), Abraham’s response is to be the
first human in the Bible’s story to challenge a divine decision. But
when God tells him, “Take your son, your only one, whom you love, Isaac
… and offer him as a burnt offering,” the report is: And Abraham got up
early in the morning!

The text does not tell us what Abraham’s motive is for questioning his
God about the fate of Sodom. Is it because his nephew, Lot, lives there?
Or is it Abraham’s sense of justice? Or is it his compassion for people
who are facing a divine catastrophe? Two of the above? All of the above?
Even if it is mainly his concern for Lot, still, that’s a nephew. Isaac
is his son! Even if it is his compassion for those morally-challenged
people of Sodom, still, there must also be compassion for his son. And
if it is his sense of justice, is there less of a case for justice in
connection with sacrificing an innocent Isaac than in the matter of the
destruction of those very guilty people?

One possible answer: The mark of Abraham’s personality is obedience. He
will obey anything that his God commands him to do. Leave your land.
Leave your birthplace. Leave your father’s house. Circumcise yourself.
Even if he is commanded to sacrifice his child, he will do it. There are
no arguments or even questions. There is only immediate compliance. But
the case of Sodom and Gomorrah is different because in this case Abraham
is not commanded to do anything. He is not the one who is to execute
judgment on the cities. It is even intriguing that the deity chooses to
inform Abraham of the divine concern over the cries from Sodom and
Gomorrah in the first place. Whatever reason one imagines for God to
tell Abraham about this, the fact is that by informing Abraham of the
divine intention to look into the situation in Sodom and Gomorrah, God
opens the door for Abraham to speak up. Commands, on the other hand,
leave no room for discussion.

A second answer (dbar ’ar): The reason that Abraham
speaks up for the more distant relative and for all the unrelated
populace of Sodom and Gomorrah but does not speak up for his own son is
precisely because it is his own son. He is sufficiently distant from Lot
and the populace of Sodom that he is in a position to argue whether
their destruction would be just. And so he argues: “Will the judge of
all the earth not do justice?!” But in the case of Isaac, he is not what
we would call an unbiased observer. He has a personal interest in the
case, an intensely personal interest. And, as such, he does not have the
same standing to argue the justice or injustice of the case.

A third answer (dbar ‘ahr): Another possible explanation
is that the outcome of the Sodom and Gomorrah matter itself is what
causes Abraham to stay silent in the matter of Isaac. In the famous
dialogue between God and Abraham over the fate of the cities of Sodom
and Gomorrah, the exchange is subtle as God responds not merely to what
Abraham says but apparently to what is in Abraham’s heart. Thus: when
Abraham learns that God means to judge these cities, he says, “Maybe
there are fifty virtuous people within the city” (18:24). God responds,
“If I find in Sodom fifty virtuous people within the city, then I’ll
sustain the whole place for their sake” (18:26). Abraham’s next
bargaining position will be the sparing of the place for forty-five
righteous, but he articulates his question in such a way as to make it
seem a small request. He does not say “forty-five.” He says:

Maybe the fifty virtuous people will be short by five.

Will you destroy the whole city for the five?

To which God replies, “I won’t destroy if I find forty-five there.” Thus
God would appear to be conveying to Abraham that there is not much point
to being cagey in one’s words when one is arguing with someone who is
omniscient. After this, Abraham words his positions more
straightforwardly: What if there are forty? thirty? etc. Abraham gets
the message that he may as well say directly what is on his mind because
that is what is going to be responded to in any case.

Even then, Abraham succeeds in getting down to ten. God agrees to
sustain the cities for ten virtuous people. But not even ten are to be
found, and the cities are destroyed. So even though Abraham’s dialogue
with God is important in several ways—including: it provides Abraham
with an opportunity to articulate the principle of justice for future
generations; and it is an important step in the growth of humankind’s
independence and development of responsibility—the fact remains that
nothing is changed for Sodom and Gomorrah by this. Abraham learns that,
since God knows what is in one’s heart, why argue? Since God knows the
situation and its necessary outcome, why speak? After the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, Abraham never argues with God again. Moses will
argue with God, Jonah will, Jeremiah will, but not Abraham. When the
creator tells Abraham to listen to Sarah and send Hagar and Ishmael
away, “Abraham got up early in the morning” (21:14). When the creator
tells him to sacrifice his son, “Abraham got up early in the morning”
(22:3).

But Abraham’s obedience is what saves Isaac in the end. What an irony:
Abraham’s silence over Isaac is more effective than his argument over
Sodom and Gomorrah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ On the third day: and Abraham raised his eyes and saw the place from a
distance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And Abraham said to his boys, “Sit here with the ass; and I and the
boy: we’ll go over there, and we’ll bow, and we’ll come back to you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and put it on Isaac,
his son, and took the fire and the knife in his hand.

And the two of them went together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And Isaac said to Abraham, his father; and he said, “My father.”

And he said, “I’m here, my son.”

And he said, “Here are the fire and the wood, but where is the sheep for
the burnt offering?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And Abraham said, “God will see to the sheep for the burnt offering, my
son.”

And the two of them went together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And they came to the place that God had said to him. And Abraham built
the altar there and arranged the wood, and he bound Isaac, his son, and
put him on the altar on top of the wood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And Abraham put out his hand and took the knife to slaughter his son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And an angel of YHWH called to him from the skies and said, “Abraham!
Abraham!”

And he said, “I’m here.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And he said, “Don’t put your hand out toward the boy, and don’t do
anything to him, because now I know that you fear God, and you didn’t
withhold your son, your only one, from me.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And Abraham raised his eyes and saw, and here was a ram behind, caught
in the thicket by its horns. And Abraham went and took the ram and made
it a burnt offering instead of his son.

---

Footnote 22:13. behind. Some manuscripts read “one” ram, i.e., Hebrew ,
rather than “behind,” Hebrew . “One” makes plainer sense, but
this may very well be a case that suggests the principle of lectio
difficilior praeferenda est (the more difficult reading is preferable).
That is, scribes tend to simplify an unusual reading more often than
they make a change that turns a simple reading into a more difficult
one. The matter remains unsolved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And Abraham called the name of that place “YHWH Yir’eh,” as is said
today: “In YHWH’s mountain it will be seen.”

---

Footnote 22:14. YHWH Yir’eh. Meaning “YHWH Will See.” (Perhaps it should be
pointed as YHWH Yera’eh, “YHWH Will Appear”—which is how it appears
later in the same verse.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And an angel of YHWH called to Abraham a second time from the skies

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ and said, “I swear by me—word of YHWH—that because you did this thing
and didn’t withhold your son, your only one,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷ that I’ll bless you and multiply your seed like the stars of the skies
and like the sand that’s on the seashore, and your seed will possess its
enemies’ gate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ And all the nations of the earth will be blessed through your seed
because you listened to my voice.”

---

Footnote 22:18. all the nations of the earth will be blessed through your seed.
This is the third occurrence of this promise. (See the comment on Gen

Footnote 12:3.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And Abraham went back to his boys, and they got up and went together
to Beer-sheba, and Abraham lived in Beer-sheba.

---

Footnote 22:19. Abraham went back to his boys. The text does not mention Isaac
going back. (And Abraham had specifically told the boys, “We’ ll come
back to you.”) Both midrash and critical scholarship have dared to raise
the possibility that in one version of the story Abraham actually
sacrifices Isaac (discussed in Who Wrote the Bible? p. 257). But in the
present form of the text itself, Isaac clearly is spared. And that makes
this verse extraordinarily powerful. Following the Aqedah, Isaac and
Abraham do not go back together. Moreover: following the Aqedah, Isaac
and Abraham are never quoted as speaking to each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And it was after these things, and it was told to Abraham, saying,
“Here Milcah has given birth, she also, to sons for your brother Nahor:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ Uz, his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel, the father of
Aram,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² and Chesed and Hazo and Pildash and Jidlaph and Bethuel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And Bethuel fathered Rebekah.” Milcah gave birth to these eight for
Nahor, Abraham’s brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Genesis 22:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she too gave birth, to Tebah
and Gaham and Tahash and Maacah.
