------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

10

¹ And Aaron’s sons, Nadab and Abihu, each took his fire-holder, and they
put fire in them and set incense on it. And they brought forward
unfitting fire, which He had not commanded them, in front of YHWH.

---

Footnote 10:1. Nadab and Abihu. These are parallel to the names Nadab and Abiyah,
the sons of Jeroboam I, the first king of the northern kingdom of Israel
(1 Kings 14:1; 15:25). King Jeroboam erects golden calves at sanctuaries
at Dan and Beth-El. The similarity of the names of the sons of the two
men who make golden calves is striking (Exodus 32; 1 Kings 12:28).

Footnote 10:1. unfitting fire, which He had not commanded them. It is not clear
just what Nadab’s and Abihu’s offense is. The text says that they bring
fire that is zrh, that YHWH had not commanded them. Some
have taken this to mean “foreign” fire and therefore have related
Nadab’s and Abihu’s act to foreign worship, i.e., to another god. The
term zrh, however, never has the meaning of “foreign” in
any other occurrence in the Torah’s law or narrative. It rather denotes
a person or thing that is outside a particular group. In any context
dealing with priests, for example, it refers to a layperson. In the only
other context referring to incense burning (Exod 30:9), “unfitting”
incense is listed along with sacrifices and libations as things that
should not be brought on the special incense altar located inside the
Tent of Meeting. That is, there is no suggestion that it means anything
foreign, but simply something that is outside the realm of what is
permitted, or, as our text says explicitly, “that YHWH had not
commanded.” Nadab and Abihu might thus be thought of as having had
positive intentions—to bring an incense offering to God—but as
unfortunately having acted incorrectly. Or, alternatively, we might
imagine a variety of less commendable motives in them. The point is that
the text does not deal with their motives because that is not the issue.
In the realm of the ritual, they have failed to observe a boundary, and
so their fate is settled. This is one of several biblical stories that
indicate that on the highest levels of the ritual realm, intention does
not matter. In the ethical realm it does. The killing of a man, for
example, may be found to be murder or to be manslaughter, depending in
part on the intention of the person who killed him. In the ritual
category, however, there are cases in which innocent motives still do
not make one innocent. Only a priest, for example, can enter the Tent of
Meeting. If a layperson enters, that person must die, and the law does
not provide for taking the motives for the trespass into account. And in
the famous case of the ark in 2 Samuel 6, Uzzah touches the ark to
steady it because it is rocking on the backs of oxen. His motive is
good. But he dies because, like Nadab and Abihu, he has violated the
boundary of the holy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

² And fire came out from in front of YHWH and consumed them! And they
died in front of YHWH.

---

Footnote 10:2. fire came out from in front of YHWH and consumed. Aaron’s
inaugural day of priestly sacrifice is thus to have been a glorious day
of pomp and ceremony, miraculously sanctioned by the divine glory and
fire; but then this extraordinary thing happens. The two eldest of his
four sons bring this offering that YHWH had not told them to make, and
the divine fire comes and consumes them. After seven chapters of laws of
sacrifices and two chapters describing the ordination rituals, the
sudden account of this horrible event in the middle of the ceremonies
comes as a shock. It is even more powerful because the exact same words
that describe the miraculous consumption of the ordination sacrifice two
verses earlier (9:24) now describe the miraculous killing of Nadab and
Abihu. It is possible that this account of the deaths of Nadab and Abihu
should be regarded as a separate story from the account of the
consecration. It is frequently understood that way, especially since it
occurs here at the beginning of a new chapter. Still, the division of
the biblical books into chapters was made centuries after composition of
the books, and there is no break in the flow of the story from the
consecration of the priesthood to the death of Aaron’s sons in the
manuscripts of Leviticus. Moreover, the last verses of the story of the
consecration picture the events as happening in the presence of the
entire people, who are assembled (9:22–24); and Moses explicitly refers
to the presence of the people in his first words to Aaron after his
sons’ deaths. He says, “That is what YHWH spoke, saying, ‘I shall be
made holy through those who are close to me, and I shall be honored in
front of all the people’” (10:3). The story of Nadab and Abihu is
therefore most probably to be understood as a horror that occurs during
the inauguration of the priesthood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And Moses said to Aaron, “That is what YHWH spoke, saying, ‘I shall be
made holy through those who are close to me, and I shall be honored in
front of all the people.’”

And Aaron was silent.

---

Footnote 10:3. That is what YHWH spoke. The meaning of Moses’ remark to Aaron is
another provocative case of ambiguity in the Torah’s narrative. Is Moses
to be viewed as saying these words in horrified recognition of a truth?
or as a stinging reprimand to Aaron concerning his sons’ behavior? or as
an explanation? The text here specifically notes that Aaron makes no
response (“And Aaron was silent”), which is understandable but not
helpful and is itself open to a gamut of interpretations.

Footnote 10:3. I shall be made holy through those who are close to me. The text
goes on conveying that there is a burden on “those who are close to me,”
as it describes the removal of Aaron’s sons’ bodies by their cousins,
and as Moses instructs Aaron and his remaining sons, Eleazar and
Ithamar, that they must not mourn for Nadab and Abihu. There follows an
account that further conveys the pain within the priestly family. Moses
finds that Aaron and his remaining sons have not eaten the sacrifices of
the day as commanded, and he reprimands Eleazar and Ithamar angrily.
Aaron replies that, after all that has happened on this day, “If I had
eaten a sin offering today would it be good in YHWH’s eyes?” And the
story concludes with a play on this last wording, noting that Aaron’s
answer “was good in Moses’ eyes” (10:19–20). Their pain is a reminder
that the standard for leaders is tougher than for others. According to
the Torah, leaders do not get away with more because of their positions.
Priests, prophets, kings, rabbis, presidents: they suffer harder
consequences.

This in turn sets up what will happen to Moses and to Aaron themselves
later. Moses quotes God here as saying, “I shall be made holy through
those who are close to me.” For those of us who know what is coming
later in the story, this is a shivering preparation for the episode of
Moses’ own sin. When Moses will strike the rock at Meribah, God will
impose a frightful consequence for him and for Aaron. And the reason
that God will give to Moses and Aaron will be: “Because you did not
trust in me, to make me holy before the eyes of the children of Israel”
(Num 20:12). Moses’ own words to Aaron here will come to testify against
him there. And as Aaron is silent here, Moses makes no answer there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And Moses called to Mishael and to Elzaphan, sons of Uzziel, Aaron’s
uncle, and said to them, “Come forward. Carry your brothers from in
front of the Holy to the outside of the camp.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And they came forward and carried them by their coats to the outside of
the camp as Moses had spoken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons, “Don’t
let loose the hair of your heads and don’t tear your clothes, so you
won’t die and He’ll be angry at all the congregation. And your brothers,
all the house of Israel, will weep for the burning that YHWH has made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And you shall not go out from the entrance of the Tent of Meeting, or
else you’ll die, because YHWH’s anointing oil is on you.”

And they did according to Moses’ word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And YHWH spoke to Aaron, saying,

---

Footnote 10:8. YHWH spoke to Aaron. This is the first time that God speaks
directly to Aaron alone since He first sent him to meet Moses (Exod
4:27), and it is right after the death of his sons! It may be that the
significance of what Nadab and Abihu have done is the reason that the
deity now addresses Aaron directly concerning the limitations and
responsibilities of his family. Or perhaps we should understand this as
an act of comfort from God to Aaron after his frightful loss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹“You shall not drink wine and beer, you and your sons with you, when
you come to the Tent of Meeting, so you won’t die. It is an eternal law
through your generations,

---

Footnote 10:9. You shall not drink wine and beer. Some have suggested on the
basis of this verse that Nadab and Abihu had been drunk and that this is
what caused them to commit the offense. Admittedly, this prohibition of
alcohol for the priests when they enter the Tabernacle seems otherwise
unrelated to the context, but that is not sufficient grounds to
denigrate these priests. Whether one believes them to be historical
persons or literary characters, one must be circumspect in judging
biblical figures. It is good practice for being circumspect when we
judge living persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ and to distinguish between the holy and the secular, and between the
impure and the pure,

---

Footnote 10:10. to distinguish. Leviticus is concerned with orderliness. This
orderliness is reminiscent of the creation account in Genesis 1. There
are key parallels of wording, especially the term for distinction
(lhabdîl). As God creates by making distinctions, expressed in
divine speech, in Genesis (“God distinguished between the light and the
darkness”), so the function of the priesthood is described in Leviticus
as “to distinguish (lhabdîl) between the holy and the secular,
and between the impure and the pure.” Here law is conceived as a
reflection in the human realm of the order that was originally pictured
in the cosmic realm.

Footnote 10:10. to distinguish between the holy and the secular. Rabbi Simcha
Weiser quoted an expression to me: The problem with American Jews today
is that they know how to make kiddush (the blessing over wine), but they
don’t know how to make habdalah (the ceremony ending the Sabbath and
beginning the secular week). That is, they do not know how to
distinguish between the holy and the secular. James Kugel sent me
something he wrote: “One of the crucial concepts of biblical religion is
almost altogether absent from modern life. The whole of the biblical
world was divided into two great domains, the holy and the profane.” In
The Hidden Face of God, I hinted at a path through discoveries of the
last century about the origin of the universe that may lead us back to
appreciation of the holy, the awesome, the wonder of the universe.

Footnote 10:10. between the impure and the pure. The Hebrew terms here are also
frequently translated as the “unclean” and the “clean.” Neither pair of
terms quite conveys the sense of the Hebrew, which, first of all,
employs terms, m and hôr, having two
different roots, thus perhaps conveying more clearly that these terms
refer to two distinct conditions, each of which has a particular legal
status. That is, being m is more than merely being
un-hôr. To be m is to be in a
particular condition, the qualities of which are invisible but which can
be transmitted to other persons or objects by contact. Therefore,
physical separation and various prescribed acts are required to remove
this condition. One comes to be in a condition of being
m as a result of specific occurrences: from
menstruation, from other flows of matter from the body’s sexual organs,
from a woman’s giving birth (for a week if it is a male baby, two weeks
if it is a female), from contact with a corpse (of a human, of a
forbidden animal, or of a permitted animal if it died of disease or was
killed by another animal), from certain forms of leprosy, or from
contact with persons or objects that are m. (One
may also become m from a forbidden sexual
relationship, although the term may possibly be understood differently
in the relevant passage, 18:24–30, and is in fact usually rendered
differently in translations; cf. also the case of human sacrifice,

Footnote 20:3.) When one performs certain acts to restrict and remove this
condition (separation, bathing, and, in some circumstances, sacrifice),
one returns to a condition of being hôr.

The common element appears to be that all these cases that make an
individual m’ involve some sort of visible change
in body fluids and/or skin, although here, as with the

It is sometimes suggested that all these cases are related to death. But
this is not correct. One must account for the inclusion of menstruation
and childbirth, which relate to the start of life, not to its end. We
may extend the explanation, then, and say that all these cases relate to
the start or the end of life. But even this does not really account for
the inclusion of leprosy among the m conditions. My
colleague Jacob Milgrom has suggested that the leprous conditions all
involve the wasting of a body in some way that resembles the wasting of
a corpse. This is possible but hard to prove in the absence of evidence
that people in biblical times made this connection in their minds. The
evidence that Milgrom gives is the case in which Miriam is stricken with
leprosy, and Aaron pleads with Moses, “Let her not be like the dead who,
when he comes out of his mother’s womb, half of his flesh is eaten up!”
But this is a unique case: Miriam is stricken by God with a kind of
leprosy so that she is rendered utterly pale (“leprous as snow”). This
singular colorless condition of her skin may be what makes her
comparable to a corpse. And Aaron is comparing her not just to any
corpse but to a stillbirth. His exclamation in that story is not
adequate evidence to make a general connection between leprosy and
death.

The essential common point, it seems to me, is that these are all things
that most people in most societies instinctively do not want to touch:
blood, semen, diseased skin, corpses. It may be that ancient Israelites
came to give all these things that they found repugnant to touch a
common name: m’. And then, in a second stage,
people came to think of m’ as a category and felt
the need to find a common underlying factor.

Was being m’ understood to be a condition in which
one was covered with some sort of microscopic creatures like a spreading
bacterium that had to be washed away (as some have believed to this
day), or was it conceived as comparable to an infectious illness, or was
it strictly a status that was conceived in legal definition? Biblical
law, like biblical narrative, has its share of ambiguities, albeit of a
different sort from narrative ambiguity. These gaps in the information
that the text provides exist, first, because the laws are pictured as
coming directly from God, who is not bound to explain or justify His
commandments to those whom He commands. Second, the law codes, like
constitutional law, are statements of the primary principles and cases,
leaving the details and variations to be worked out by priests or judges
as they arise (Lev 10:10–11). Third, much of the law was practiced in
the daily life of the people of Israel over centuries, and so what
appear as gaps to us may have been common knowledge in the community in
which the text was composed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ and to instruct the children of Israel all the laws that YHWH has
spoken to them by the hand of Moses.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And Moses said to Aaron and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons who
were left, “Take the grain offering that is left from YHWH’s offerings
by fire and eat it as unleavened bread beside the altar, because it is
the holy of holies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And you shall eat it in a holy place, because it is your statutory
share, and it is your sons’ statutory share from YHWH’s offerings by
fire, because that is what I was commanded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ And you shall eat the breast of the elevation offering and the thigh
of the donation in a pure place—you and your sons and your daughters
with you—because they have been given as your statutory share and your
sons’ statutory share from the peace-offering sacrifices of the children
of Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ They shall bring the thigh of the donation and the breast of the
elevation offering with the offerings by fire of the fats to elevate, an
elevation offering in front of YHWH; and it will be yours and your sons’
with you as an eternal law, as YHWH commanded.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And Moses inquired about the goat of the sin offering, and here it was
burnt! And he was angry at Eleazar and at Ithamar, Aaron’s sons who were
left, saying,

---

Footnote 10:16. inquired. This is the middle of the Torah in terms of words, and,
appropriately, it is the word “to inquire” (Hebrew ), the word
that later comes to mean exegesis of the Torah. (See the comment on

Footnote 11:42.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷“Why didn’t you eat the sin offering in the place of the Holy—because
it’s the holy of holies, and He gave it to you for bearing the
congregation’s crime, for making atonement over them in front of YHWH!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ Here, its blood hasn’t been brought to the Holy, inside. You should
have eaten it in the Holy as I commanded!”

---

Footnote 10:18. as I commanded. See the comment on Lev 8:31. Here again Moses
speaks of himself as commanding something concerning Aaron. And here
again there is uncertainty about the text, since other versions differ
from this reading in the Masoretic Text; they read that it is God who
commands Moses. The uncertainty in the technical matter of the
differences in the manuscripts underlines the larger issue: the growth
in the stature and authority of Moses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And Aaron spoke to Moses: “Here, today they brought forward their sin
offering and their burnt offering in front of YHWH. When things like
these have happened to me, if I had eaten a sin offering today would it
be good in YHWH’s eyes?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 10:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ And Moses listened, and it was good in his eyes.
