------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“Speak to the children of Israel, saying: A woman, when she will bear
seed and give birth to a male, will be impure seven days. She will be
impure like the days of the impurity of her menstruation.

---

Footnote 12:2. the impurity of her menstruation. This is the first occurrence of
this matter in a portion dealing with law. Prior to this it has come up
in the story of Rachel’s hiding her father Laban’s teraphim. There
Rachel keeps Laban at a distance by telling him, “I have the way of
women.” What attitudes toward menstruation do the Torah’s laws and
stories reflect? The most neutral view is that menstruation was a
specific condition with a particular legal status. But that is
stretching in order to downplay the negative conception of menstruation
that is contained here. Indeed, some people have regarded it as a kind
of contamination, and some have even imagined some kind of invisible
creatures on a person who is in this impure condition. Freud elucidated
the psychological component in explaining why this subject is so
mysterious and even intimidating to males. Or, even at a more conscious
level, blood is intimidating to a large proportion of us, who look away
when blood is drawn from ourselves or others, or who cannot bear to
watch bloody scenes in drama, or who are distressed at the idea of
contact with another person’s blood, or who, like Lady Macbeth,
associate blood with guilt. This list could easily be extended. The
point is that blood is powerful: physically, symbolically, and
emotionally. For a woman it is a natural part of her life from the time
of puberty, visible each month. But for a man it is a sign that
something is wrong, almost always associated with injury or illness. And
so menstruation is a mysterious and intimidating subject even to a male
who fully understands the biology of it. Laban wants his teraphim back,
but not enough to approach his daughter when she has “the way of women.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ And on the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ And thirty days and three days she shall remain in blood of purity. She
shall not touch any holy thing, and she shall not come to the holy place
until the completion of the days of her purification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ And if she will give birth to a female, then she will be impure two
weeks, like her impurity. And sixty days and six days she shall remain
with blood of purity.

---

Footnote 12:5. two weeks.... And sixty days and six days. But it is one week plus
thirty-three days for a male (12:2–4): a total of forty for a male but
eighty for a female. No one knows the reason why it is double for a
female.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And at the completion of the days of her purification, for a son or for
a daughter, she shall bring a lamb in its first year for a burnt
offering and a pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering to the entrance
of the Tent of Meeting, to the priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And he shall bring it forward in front of YHWH and make atonement over
her, and she will be purified from the source of her blood. This is the
instruction for the one giving birth to a male or to a female.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 12:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And if her hand will not find enough for a sheep, then she shall take
two turtledoves or two pigeons, one for a burnt offering and one for a
sin offering, and the priest shall make atonement over her, and she will
be purified.”

---

Footnote 12:8. her hand will not find enough. Meaning: if she will not be able to
afford. (See comment on Lev 5:7,11.)
