------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

17

¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“Speak to Aaron and to his sons and to all the children of Israel and
say to them: This is the thing that YHWH has commanded, saying:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ Any man from the house of Israel who slaughters an ox or a sheep or a
goat in the camp or who slaughters outside the camp

---

Footnote 17:3. Any man … who slaughters. Most sacrifices involve the ritual
slaughter of an animal that is to be used for food. In Leviticus, YHWH
forbids the slaughter of animals outside of a formal ritual setting. For
Leviticus there is no such occupation as butcher. If one wants to eat
meat, one must bring the animal to the priest, who sacrifices it in the
prescribed manner at the altar, retains a portion of it for the
sustenance of the priesthood, and gives back the rest for consumption.
The priests eat their portion according to prescription as well:
specifically, priests eat meat with unleavened bread. As with the laws
of Exodus, the reasons for requiring ritual slaughter are not stated
explicitly, but there appears to be more at stake than the support of
the priesthood. In the initial state of creation in Genesis, humans are
vegetarian. Genesis depicts animals, but not plants, as sharing with
humans the quality of being living beings (nepeš ayyh,Gen
1:20,21,24,30; 2:7,19). Following the flood, animals are permitted as
food. Now the sacrificial laws of Leviticus recognize that this involves
the taking of life, and they decree that life cannot be taken as a
secular act of slaughter. It must be done in a setting that reflects
sensitivity to what is at stake. An indicator that this is the
orientation of the Levitical law is that it permits one to hunt game
animals such as deer, which one cannot easily lead to an altar, but then
one must perform the act of pouring off the blood of the animal because,
it says, “the flesh’s life (nepeš) is in the blood” (17:11).

At several places in my comments on Leviticus, I have noted that we have
lost the feeling of ritual as it was known in the biblical world. Here I
would add that if we still had a greater feeling for ritual we would
have more of a feeling for the life of an animal. For most humans in
this age, we are farther removed from the life and death of the animals
(and plants!) that we eat than in any previous generation. We buy meat
in sealed packages, so that it no longer resembles the animal from which
it came. We have lost the awareness of how this food came to be on our
table. Part of life is the consumption of life-forms by other
life-forms. But whether one is vegetarian or carnivorous, one will
enrich one’s life—and understand better one’s place in the world—if one
connects a ritual with that consumption. If it can no longer be
sacrifice, then perhaps it can be saying grace, or a blessing, or
occasionally visiting a farm or ranch and observing the animals and
plants: watching, touching, listening to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ and has not brought it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting to bring
forward an offering to YHWH in front of YHWH’s Tabernacle: blood will be
counted to that man. He has spilled blood. And that man will be cut off
from among his people.

---

Footnote 17:4. Tent of Meeting. There is a long additional line here in the
Septuagint, Qumran, and Samaritan texts, which has been lost in the
Masoretic Text. The verse reads: “and has not brought it to the entrance
of the Tent of Meeting to make it a burnt offering or peace offering to
YHWH to be acceptable for you as a pleasant smell, and he slaughters it
outside and has not brought it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting …”
The eye of the scribe writing the Masoretic Text apparently skipped the
line because his eye jumped from one occurrence of the phrase “brought
it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting” to the next. This shows how
much of a text can be changed by scribal error and is a warning to take
account of all the available versions of the text. (It is also a
reminder that systems of seeking patterns or codes by counting the
text’s letters are erroneous. See the comment on Exod 1:5.)

Footnote 17:4. blood will be counted to that man. He has spilled blood. This
person has slaughtered an animal, but the text speaks of it as an
equivalent of murdering a human! Why does this act merit such
extraordinary severity? Because it merges two of the most essential
commandments of the Torah. First, it involves taking a life without
respect for life’s sanctity—as discussed in the comment on 17:3. And,
second, it violates the law of centralization of worship, which is
declared for the first time in this chapter. According to the law, one
can sacrifice only at one place on earth: at the altar at the entrance
of the Tent of Meeting. If one wants to eat lamb or beef, one must bring
one’s sheep or cow to that central altar. In the wilderness it is at the
Tent. Later, in the land, it is at the Temple. (The Tent of Meeting is
inside the Temple. See the comment on Exod 26:30.) But the all-important
point is centralization of worship. As I commented earlier (Exod 26:6),
centralization and monotheism go together: one God, one altar. Each town
in Israel does not have its own altar or its own Tabernacle. This is
explicitly forbidden here. In the books of Kings, it is the standard for
judging every king of Israel and Judah: did he allow “high places”
(Hebrew bmôt) outside of the Jerusalem Temple or not? The only
two kings to get nearly perfect ratings (Hezekiah and Josiah) are the
two kings who most zealously enforce centralization. Today, one does not
see a multiplicity of synagogues, churches, or mosques and assume that
this means that a multiplicity of gods is being worshiped. But in the
biblical world, when monotheism is a new idea, the principle of one
God–one Temple–one altar is presented as supremely important.

Footnote 17:4. cut off from among his people. This may mean to die without heirs
or not to be buried in the ancestral tomb or not to join one’s ancestors
in an afterlife. See the comment on Exod 30:33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵ So that the children of Israel will bring their sacrifices—which they
are making at the open field—and will bring them to YHWH, to the
entrance of the Tent of Meeting, to the priest, and make them sacrifices
of peace offerings to YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And the priest shall fling the blood on YHWH’s altar at the entrance of
the Tent of Meeting and burn the fat to smoke as a pleasant smell to
YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And they shall not make their sacrifices anymore to the satyrs, after
whom they are whoring. This shall be an eternal law to them through
their generations.

---

Footnote 17:7. satyrs. It is not certain what these are. The term “satyrs” is
used because the Hebrew term has to do with goats. They are mentioned in
Isa 13:21; 34:14 and in 2 Chr 11:15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸“And you shall say to them: Any man from the house of Israel and from
the aliens who will reside among them who will make a burnt offering or
a sacrifice

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ and will not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting to make it
to YHWH: that man will be cut off from his people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰“And any man from the house of Israel and from the aliens who will
reside among them who will eat any blood: then I shall set my face
against the person who eats the blood, and I shall cut him off from
among his people.

---

Footnote 17:10. person. This is very difficult to capture in translation. The
word for “person,” Hebrew nepeš, is the same word that means “life”
three times in v. 11. In the Hebrew, therefore, it is more obvious that
the issue is that a living creature is eating blood, which bears the
life of another living creature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ Because the flesh’s life is in the blood, and I have given it to you
on the altar to make atonement over your lives, because it is the blood
that makes atonement for life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² On account of this I have said to the children of Israel: every person
among you shall not eat blood, and the alien who resides among you shall
not eat blood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³“And any man from the children of Israel and from the aliens who
reside among them who will hunt game, animal or bird, that may be eaten:
he shall spill out its blood and cover it with dust.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ Because all flesh’s life: its blood is one with its life. So I say to
the children of Israel: you shall not eat the blood of all flesh—because
all flesh’s life: it is its blood. Everyone of those who eat it will be
cut off.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵ And any living being, whether a citizen or an alien, who will eat
carcass or a torn animal shall wash his clothes and shall wash with
water and will be impure until evening and then will be pure.

---

Footnote 17:15. carcass or a torn animal. See the comments on Lev 7:24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 17:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And if he will not wash them and will not wash his flesh, then he
shall bear his crime.”
