------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“Speak to all the congregation of the children of Israel, and you shall
say to them: You shall be holy, because I, YHWH, your God, am holy.

---

Footnote 19:2. be holy. What is meant here by being holy? The chapter that begins
with this statement stands out because, perhaps more than any other in
the Torah, it merges major commandments of so many different sorts. It
includes most of the Ten Commandments, sacrifices, justice, caring for
the poor and the infirm, treatment of women, of the elderly, food,
magic, loving one’s neighbor as oneself, loving an alien as oneself. If
one had to choose only one chapter out of the Torah to make known, it
might well be this one.

The strange mixing of so many different kinds of commandments may convey
that every commandment is important. Even if we are naturally inclined
to regard some commandments as more important than others, and some
commandments as most important of all, this tapestry presses us to see
what is important and valuable in every commandment, even commandments
that one may question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³“You shall each fear his mother and his father, and you shall observe
my Sabbaths. I am YHWH, your God.

---

Footnote 19:3. You shall each fear his mother and his father. Mother comes before
father (the reverse of the order in the Ten Commandments). Rashi says
this is because one naturally fears the father more than the mother, so
the text needs to emphasize fearing the mother. And he says that the
Fifth Commandment has the reverse because it says to “honor your father
and your mother,” and one naturally honors the mother more than the
father, so the text needs to emphasize honoring the father. But this is
not necessarily true. Whatever the reason for the word order here,
though, at the very least it shows that the text sometimes puts father
first and sometimes mother. And the fact that it says to fear them,
rather than the Decalogue’s command to honor them, is yet another
parallel between parents and God, whom the Israelites are told to fear
as well (Deut 8:6). This in turn reminds us that this linkage between
parents and God is established at the beginning of the Torah: God is
said to create humans in the divine image and likeness (Gen 1:26), and
then the first human is said to produce a son in his image and likeness
(Gen 5:3). And it reminds us that the fifth commandment (to honor
parents) comes between the first four, which relate to God, and the
latter five, which relate to fellow humans. And, to this day, the most
natural and common analogy that people use when talking about
conceptions of God is: parents. Indeed, it is hardly a psychological
insight to recognize that most people’s conceptions of a deity derive
precisely from their experience of their parents. Especially in infancy,
one’s parents are godlike in their power and their caring for their
children. Thus in a variety of ways parents are seen in this role in the
Torah.

Footnote 19:3. You shall each fear his mother and his father, and you shall
observe my Sabbaths. Why are parents and Sabbaths put together here?
(They come next to each other in the Ten Commandments as well, in
reverse order.) It reminds us of the enormous power of the Sabbath to
bind a family together. My first Jewish memory in my life is the image
of my mother lighting the Sabbath candles and giving my sister and me a
kiss. Then my father would say the kiddush over the wine and give us
each a sip. In many families the parents say a blessing over each child:
“May you be like Sarah, Rebekah, Leah, and Rachel”; “May you be like
Ephraim and Manasseh.” In many, the husband recites “A Woman of Valor”
from the book of Proverbs to his wife. The potential for making
something beautiful that will last through a person’s life is
tremendous. Even more: when one grows up, recalls these things from
childhood, and repeats them with one’s own children, one encounters the
extraordinary feeling of being linked through generations: both
generations past and those to come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴“Do not turn to idols, and you shall not make molten gods for
yourselves. I am YHWH, your God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵“And when you will make a peace-offering sacrifice to YHWH, you shall
sacrifice it so that it will be accepted for you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ It shall be eaten on the day of your sacrifice and on the next day; and
what is left until the third day shall be burned in fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And if it will be eaten on the third day it is a repugnant thing. It
shall not be acceptable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ And anyone who eats it shall bear his crime, because he desecrated
YHWH’s holy thing, and that person will be cut off from his people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And when you reap your land’s harvest, you shall not finish harvesting
your field’s corner, and you shall not gather your harvest’s gleaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And you shall not strip your vineyard, and you shall not collect the
vineyard’s fallen fruit. You shall leave them for the poor and for the
alien. I am YHWH, your God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹“You shall not steal, and you shall not lie, and you shall not act
false, each against his fellow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And you shall not swear by my name falsely, so that you would
desecrate your God’s name. I am YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³“You shall not exploit your neighbor, and you shall not rob. An
employee’s wages shall not stay through the night with you until
morning.

---

Footnote 19:13. stay through the night. The term commonly has this meaning of
spending the night (Gen 24:54; 31:54; 32:14).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴ You shall not curse a deaf person, and you shall not place a stumbling
block in front of a blind person. And you shall fear your God. I am
YHWH.

---

Footnote 19:14. you shall fear your God. One might think that he or she has
nothing to fear from the deaf or blind persons who cannot know who is
wronging them, but one is warned that God knows and that one should be
afraid of the consequences. In this matter of divine knowledge, one is
reminded of the case of David’s affair with Bathsheba and his
elimination of her husband—which are then known, revealed, and paid back
by God (2 Samuel 11–12); and one is reminded of Jacob’s deception of his
father, Isaac (who is blind!)—which is paid back in kind when Jacob is
in turn deceived by his sons with the same items that he used to deceive
his father: his brother’s cloak and the parts of a goat (Gen 27:9–16;
37:31; see the comment on Gen 37:31).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵“You shall not do an injustice in judgment. You shall not be partial
to a weak person, and you shall not favor a big person. You shall judge
your fellow with justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ You shall not go with slander among your people. You shall not stand
by at your neighbor’s blood. I am YHWH.

---

Footnote 19:16. stand by at your neighbor’s blood. The meaning of this wording is
uncertain. It has usually been understood to mean: to stand by when
someone’s life is in danger and one could do something to save it (also:
to fail to come forward as a witness when one has knowledge concerning a
taking of life). This is the opposite of the principle in American law
that one does not have an “affirmative duty to rescue.” The biblical
principle is that one has to help a fellow human being if one is able.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷“You shall not hate your brother in your heart. You shall criticize
your fellow, so you shall not bear sin over him.

---

Footnote 19:17. so you shall not bear sin over him. If one fails to tell a person
that he is doing wrong, then one bears some responsibility for things
that this person goes on to do that might have been prevented.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ You shall not take revenge, and you shall not keep on at the children
of your people. And you shall love your neighbor as yourself. I am YHWH.

---

Footnote 19:18. You shall not take revenge. This general principle does not apply
to the legal case of the “avenger of blood,” which is a different term
in Hebrew (Num 35:12,19; Deut 19:6). That case involves the execution of
someone who is found to be guilty of premeditated murder. Revenge is
such a threatening matter that it is understood in the Torah to belong
to God alone, not to humans. The essential statement of this is the
famous “Vengeance and recompense are mine” (Deut 32:35). Only God takes
revenge (Deut 32:41,43) or can command humans to take revenge (Num
31:2). The notable exception is the law “If a man will strike his slave
or his maid with a rod, and he dies by his hand, he shall be avenged”
(Exod 21:20). The special issue there apparently is that God takes an
interest in the life of a slave. Since the Israelites themselves were
slaves, and since God brought them out, it is a matter of divine
interest that Israel never mistreat a slave.

This command comes in the chapter of the Torah that most conveys the
idea of humans being like God (imitatio Dei). It begins: “Be holy
because I am holy” (19:2). And so those beginning words should not be
taken to mean imitation of God in just any way. The command is
specifically to be holy, as God is—to live a life of holiness as defined
for a human being, because God is holy.

Footnote 19:18. you shall not keep on. Meaning: to maintain hostility over time.
One must not go on feeling anger, resentment, or a grudge against
someone. Note that these commands against taking revenge or persisting
in hostile feelings do not address the question of whether the revenge
or the keeping on is justified or not. The issue here is that one
believes oneself to have been wronged, and the instruction is: don’t get
even, don’t harbor the feeling forever. It is destructive to one’s
energy and one’s spirit.

Footnote 19:18. the children of your people. Fellow Israelites. This section
refers to ways in which Israelites are commanded by law to behave toward
one another. Next, the laws requiring equal treatment for aliens will
expand this. And, ultimately, this behavior of a community’s members
toward one another is meant to be observed by others, who will choose to
do likewise. And thus Abraham’s descendants would behave in such a way
as to be a source of blessing to all the families of the earth.

Footnote 19:18. love your neighbor as yourself. Also translated as “companion” or
“fellow,” the word (Hebrew rea‘) means a member of one’s own group, a
peer. In some contexts that will mean one’s fellow human being. In
others it will mean a friend or neighbor. (Thus, in Gen 38:12,20 it
refers to Judah’s “friend,” who is an Adullamite.) In others it will
mean a fellow member of a particular community. Some understand “Love
your neighbor as yourself” as applying only to one’s fellow Israelites.
Even if one takes that view of this commandment, one must acknowledge
that in this same chapter there is also the commandment to love the
alien, the foreigner, as oneself as well (19:34). The people of Israel
are thus commanded to love all human beings, not just their own people,
no matter how one understands the term. And this is extraordinary.

The law of Leviticus is pervaded with the notion of distinction: between
priest and layperson, between holy and secular, between pure and impure,
between Israel and the other nations, between good and bad, and
sometimes simply between permitted and forbidden with no reasons given.
The book defines the priest’s task (to distinguish, Lev 10:10) in terms
that explicitly recall God’s creation by distinction in Genesis 1. The
law of the eternal light recalls God’s first distinction in the creation
(between light and darkness). Leviticus forbids one to merge that which
has been distinguished in creation: to breed two species of animals
together, to sow a field with mixed seed, or to wear clothing of mixed
fabric, ša‘atnz (19:19). It establishes a specific location for
sacrifice and excludes all others. Nadab and Abihu are killed for an act
that exceeds their defined function. However, Leviticus does include one
exception to this pervasive idea of differentiating, which, ironically,
is perhaps the most famous line in the book, namely: “Love your neighbor
as yourself!” Besides everything else that is impressive about this
instruction, it stands out as anomalous in a book that so regularly
makes distinctions. In relations with one’s fellow human beings one is
commanded instead to equate them—to oneself and, by necessary
implication, to one another. The exception improves the rule. The
distinctions in ritual and ethical matters serve various needs of the
people and the will of their God, but underpinning the distinctions is a
principle of equality of treatment for all.

Another point: Note the progression: Love yourself. Love your neighbor.
Love the alien. Love God (coming later, in Deut 6:5).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹“You shall observe my laws. Your animal: you shall not mate two kinds.
Your field: you shall not seed two kinds. And a garment of two kinds,
sha‘atnez: it shall not go on you.

---

Footnote 19:19. you shall not mate two kinds. One is not permitted to mate one’s
animal with an animal of a different species.

Footnote 19:19. you shall not seed two kinds. One is not permitted to mix seeds
of different species of plants together.

Footnote 19:19. sha‘atnez. One is not permitted to wear an item of clothing made
of two different species of fabric. This is specified in Deuteronomy as
wool and linen together. The former comes from an animal, a sheep; and
the latter comes from a plant, flax. On these laws against mixtures, see
the comments on Deut 22:9,11.

It is a curious juxtaposition: the commandment to love one’s neighbor as
oneself directly followed by three commandments to maintain
distinctions. It seems to be saying: distinctions among animals, plants,
and clothing are appropriate, but making distinctions in one’s love of
humankind is an offense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰“And when a man will lie with a woman—an intercourse of seed—and she
is a maid designated to a man, and she has not been redeemed, or freedom
has not been given to her, there will be a reparation. They shall not be
put to death, because she was not freed.

---

Footnote 19:20. a maid designated to a man. A female slave has been designated
for marriage to a particular man (either her owner or another man), but
the marriage has not yet taken place. If another man has sexual
relations with her, it is not adultery since she is not yet married, and
therefore there is no death penalty for either the man or the woman; but
there is still a reparation to be paid to the owner for the infringement
on his maid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And he shall bring his guilt offering to YHWH, to the entrance of the
Tent of Meeting, a ram for a guilt offering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² And the priest shall atone over him with the ram for the guilt
offering in front of YHWH over his sin that he committed, and it will be
forgiven for him from his sin that he committed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³“And when you will come to the land, and you will plant any tree for
eating, you shall leave its top with its fruit uncircumcised. It shall
be uncircumcised for three years for you. It shall not be eaten.

---

Footnote 19:23. leave its top with its fruit uncircumcised. The Hebrew uses the
same word that is used for an uncircumcised foreskin. The treetop,
including its fruit, is not to be cut until it is three years old. Thus
one may not eat a tree’s fruit for the first three years, one takes it
to the priests in the fourth year, and one may eat it in the fifth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:24

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁴ And in the fourth year all of its fruit shall be holy, tributes for
YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:25

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁵ And in the fifth year you shall eat its fruit, to increase its produce
for you. I am YHWH, your God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁶“You shall not eat with the blood. You shall not practice divination,
and you shall not practice soothsaying.

---

Footnote 19:26. You shall not eat with the blood. One is not to eat meat with
blood still in it.

Footnote 19:26. divination. Discovering what is going on by means of magic.

Footnote 19:26. soothsaying. Telling the future by means of magic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:27

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁷ You shall not trim your head’s edge, and you shall not destroy your
beard’s edge.

---

Footnote 19:27. your head’s edge. Sideburns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:28

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁸ You shall not put a cut in your flesh for a person, and you shall not
put an inscription of a tattoo in you. I am YHWH.

---

Footnote 19:28. for a person. Meaning: for a dead person; as a sign of mourning
for someone who has died. Hebrew nepeš can mean soul, person, or life,
depending on its context. Its root meaning, like other Hebrew words
relating to life, has to do with respiration.

Footnote 19:28. inscription of a tattoo. Writing in the skin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:29

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁹“Do not desecrate your daughter to make her a prostitute, so the land
will not go to prostitution, and the land will fill with perversion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:30

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁰ You shall observe my Sabbaths and fear my holy place. I am YHWH.

---

Footnote 19:30. fear my holy place. Commentators and translators often soften the
Hebrew word for “fear” here, taking it to mean “revere” or “hold in
awe.” But there is reason to believe that it really does mean “fear,”
because it refers to a sacred place, applying first to the Tabernacle
and later to the Temple. Laypersons are not even permitted to enter this
place. We are told four times: “An outsider who comes close shall be put
to death” (Num 1:51; 3:10,38; 18:7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:31

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³¹“Do not turn to ghosts, and do not seek spirits of acquaintances, to
become impure by them. I am YHWH, your God.

---

Footnote 19:31. ghosts, spirits of acquaintances. There is archaeological and
textual evidence that ancient Israelites engaged in ancestor veneration,
i.e., worship at the site of the tombs of known relations. The Israelite
priests were opposed to this, and the biblical law codes forbid it. It
appears to have come to an end during the reign of Hezekiah, king of
Judah. My colleague Baruch Halpern has shown that it was an ironic
consequence of the Assyrians’ destruction of the Israelite countryside,
which cut the people off from these traditional sites. My student Shawna
Dolansky Overton and I have written about this matter: In several places
in which wizards, sorcerers, and other practitioners of forbidden magic
are mentioned, we also find this phrase, Hebrew ’ôb
wyidd‘nî(m) (Deut 18:11; 1 Samuel 28; 2 Kings
23:24; Isa 8:19). Although the precise meaning of each term is
uncertain, the phrase is almost always understood as “necromancer” or
“medium.” The term ’ôb is particularly ambiguous because it is found in
a variety of contexts in which it can be understood as “spirit,
ancestral spirit, the person controlled by a spirit, a bag of skin, the
pit from which spirits are called up, a ghost, or a demon.” It has also
been suggested that its etymology should be sought in the Ugaritic
phrase il ’ib, usually understood as cognate to Hebrew lhê
’bîw but plausibly meaning “god of the pit” rather than “god of
the father(s)” (William Propp). Although ’ôb is often found on its own
(usually when it means “pit” or “bag of skin”), the word
yidd‘nî(m) occurs only in tandem with ’ôb. Some scholars
take the phrase as a hendiadys while others, along with most
translations, see it as referring to separate persons (e.g., medium and
wizard). The root seems to be yd‘, but what remains unclear is whether
the “one who knows” is the spirit being consulted or the necromancer who
does the consulting. This phrase is also frequently translated as “one
who has a familiar spirit.” No matter how these words are translated,
each translation conveys the basic idea of communication between the
living and the dead. Although the biblical references to life after
death are often noted to be fewer than one would have expected, the fact
remains: these references plus the archaeological evidence show that
Israelites in biblical times believed in an afterlife. (For more
discussion of the belief in afterlife in biblical Israel, and for
citations and references, see our article, “Death and Afterlife: The
Biblical Silence,” in Judaism in Late Antiquity, vol. 4: Death,
Afterlife, Resurrection, and the World to Come, edited by Alan J.
Avery-Peck and Jacob Neusner.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:32

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³²“You shall get up in front of an aged person, and you shall show
respect in front of an elderly person. And you shall fear your God. I am
YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:33

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³³“And if an alien will reside with you in your land, you shall not
persecute him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:34

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁴ The alien who resides with you shall be to you like a citizen of
yours, and you shall love him as yourself, because you were aliens in
the land of Egypt. I am YHWH, your God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:35

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁵“You shall not do an injustice in judgment, in measurement, in weight,
and in quantity.

---

Footnote 19:35. You shall not do an injustice in judgment. These exact words are
already said in 19:15. Why are they repeated here? Because the law here
is adding weights and measures to the picture. This conveys that an
abuse in doing business is in the same category as an abuse in court.
The issues are equity, fairness, honesty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:36

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁶ You shall have just scales, just weights, a just ephah, and a just
hin. I am YHWH, your God, who brought you out from the land of Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 19:37

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³⁷“And you shall observe all my laws and all my judgments and do them. I
am YHWH.”
