------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

24

¹ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:2

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²“Command the children of Israel that they shall take clear pressed
olive oil to you for the light, to keep up a lamp always.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

³ Outside of the pavilion of the Testimony, in the Tent of Meeting, Aaron
shall arrange it from evening until morning in front of YHWH always, an
eternal law through your generations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:4

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁴ He shall arrange the lamps on the pure menorah in front of YHWH always.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁵“And you shall take fine flour and bake it into twelve loaves: each
loaf shall be two-tenths of a measure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:6

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁶ And you shall set them in two rows, six to a row, on the pure table in
front of YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:7

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁷ And you shall put clear frankincense on each row, and it will be a
representative portion for the bread, an offering by fire to YHWH.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:8

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁸ On the Sabbath day, on the Sabbath day, he shall arrange it in front of
YHWH always from the children of Israel, an eternal covenant.

---

Footnote 24:8. On the Sabbath day, on the Sabbath day. Meaning: on every Sabbath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:9

------------------------------------------------------------------------

⁹ And it shall be Aaron’s and his sons’, and they shall eat it in a holy
place, because it is the holy of holies to him from YHWH’s offerings by
fire, an eternal law.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:10

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁰ And a son of an Israelite woman—and he was a son of an Egyptian
man—went out among the children of Israel, and the son of the Israelite
woman fought with an Israelite man in the camp.

24:10–23. a son of an Israelite woman.... they battered him with stone.
It is curious that this single story occurs here in a section fifteen
chapters long that otherwise simply states the law without any
accompanying narratives. This story’s significance may lie in the fact
that it states that the man in question is the son of an Israelite woman
and an Egyptian father, and the deity’s decision includes the notation
that the law applies equally to an alien and to a citizen. It therefore
appears that the offender in this story is an alien (see the comment on
Lev 24:16,22), and the account therefore has the value not only of
dramatizing the law concerning blasphemy, but also of dramatizing the
principle of equality before the law: “You shall have one judgment: it
will be the same for the alien and the citizen” (24:22). Indeed, the
group of laws that were described above as reflecting the notion of
equivalence of justice (“eye for eye … ”) is embedded in the middle of
this very story. The story may appear here, therefore, because it
illustrates several important laws and an extremely important legal
principle.

The story is also interesting in parallel with the only other narrative
in Leviticus, the story of the consecration of the priesthood. Like that
other story, which culminates in the deaths of Aaron’s sons, the account
of the blasphemy expresses what is at stake in the people’s young
relationship with their God. Further, in the earlier account, it is God
who deals with the offenders, Nadab and Abihu, directly; whereas in this
account of the blasphemy, humans themselves must deal justice. The two
stories thus convey together the idea that the law is both a divine and
a human concern.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹¹ And the son of the Israelite woman profaned the name and cursed. And
they brought him to Moses. And his mother’s name was Shelomith, daughter
of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:12

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹² And they left him under watch, to determine it for them by YHWH’s
word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:13

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹³ And YHWH spoke to Moses, saying,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:14

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁴“Take out the one who cursed to the outside of the camp, and let all
who heard lay their hands on his head, and all the congregation shall
batter him.

---

Footnote 24:14. lay their hands on his head. The community’s elders lay their
hands on the head of a bull that is slaughtered as a sacrifice for a sin
(4:15); and Aaron and his sons lay their hands on the head of the animal
that is sacrificed as a sin offering (Lev 8:14). And so the mention of
this ritual here brings up a frightful image of what is to come for the
man who cursed, and it emphasizes the unusual solemnity of this
execution for the crime of cursing God.

Footnote 24:14. batter. Meaning: stone to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:15

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁵“And you shall speak to the children of Israel, saying: Any man who
curses his God: he shall bear his sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:16

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁶ And one who profanes YHWH’s name shall be put to death. All the
congregation shall batter him. The same for the alien and the citizen:
when he profanes the name he shall be put to death.

---

Footnote 24:16. the same for the alien and the citizen. This phrase occurs at
both the beginning and the end of this section on equivalence in
justice. This principle of treating an alien like a citizen comes up
often in the Torah, but its double emphasis here in the story of a man
who has an Israelite mother and an Egyptian father is significant. It
indicates that this man is an alien, because there would be no reason to
make a special point of this principle if he were a citizen (that is, a
native Israelite). It is further evidence that in biblical times a
person’s identification was based on the father (patrilineal descent).
In every case we have encountered thus far, the woman and children take
the ethnic and religious identity of the woman’s husband—Sarah, Rebekah,
Leah, Rachel, Zipporah, and their children. And all sons of Levite
fathers are Levites, regardless of the tribal origins of their mothers.
Likewise, all tribal identification is through the father (see the
comment on Num 36:3). Identification in the Torah is patrilineal. This
continues through the Tanak until the time of Ezra and Nehemiah. At that
point it appears to change, because when Nehemiah opposes marriages of
Jewish men to women from certain other groups, he instructs that their
children be excluded (Nehemiah 13). And in postbiblical Judaism,
identification came to be based on the mother (matrilineal descent). In
the Torah, however, it follows the father in every case. Identification
by patrilineal descent (in addition to matrilineal descent, not in place
of it) is at present a matter of dispute among the movements in Judaism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:17

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁷“And a man who will strike any human’s life shall be put to death,

---

Footnote 24:17. strike any human’s life. Meaning: strike to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:18

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁸ and one who strikes an animal’s life shall pay for it: a life for a
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:19

------------------------------------------------------------------------

¹⁹ And a man who will make an injury in his fellow: as he has done, so it
shall be done to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:20

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²⁰ A break for a break, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: as he
will make an injury in a human, so it shall be made in him.

---

Footnote 24:20. an eye for an eye. Perhaps the most perplexing of the ethical
laws is the principle of justice expressed in the formulation “an eye
for an eye.” It has frequently been cited as evidence of the stern
character of YHWH, but that is a misunderstanding. In its context in
Leviticus it applies solely to human justice. YHWH Himself frequently
follows a more relenting course than that, from the golden calf event to
a series of reprieves for seemingly undeserving individuals and
communities in subsequent books of the Tanak. As for the meaning of this
formulation for human justice, we must read it in its context, where the
basic principle appears to be that punishment should correspond to the
crime and never exceed it:

A man who will make an injury in his fellow: as he has done, so it shall
be done to him.

A break for a break, an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: as he will
make an injury in a human, so it shall be made in him.

And one who strikes [mortally] an animal shall pay for it, and one who
strikes [mortally] a human shall be put to death.

You shall have one judgment: it will be the same for the alien and the
citizen.

The common principle of all the instances in this group appears to be
one of equivalence in justice. To that extent it is a prohibition
against imposing punishments that do not suit the crime; e.g., execution
as a punishment for killing an animal or for wounding a man; or more
severe punishments for lower-class defendants or foreigners than for
others. The question remains as to whether ”a break for a break, an eye
for an eye” was meant literally or if it likewise referred figuratively
to equivalence of punishment: not requiring the court actually to gouge
the eye of a man convicted of gouging, but only to exact an appropriate
monetary compensation for the victim. The text certainly appears to be
speaking quite literally. It is set in the middle of a story of an
actual stoning, and the wording would not ordinarily be taken as
figurative were it not for our surprise at the severity of it in
comparison to our own current laws. Still, we must be cautious about our
ability to judge the meaning of idiomatic expressions in the Hebrew of
an ancient age, a Hebrew in which, for example, the expression “to know
God face-to-face” explicitly did not mean actually to see the deity’s
face (Exod 33:11; cf. 33:20,23). Further, the earliest postbiblical
Jewish sources already understood “an eye for an eye” to mean monetary,
and not literal, compensation. In the present state of our knowledge,
therefore, we may be limited to saying that this text either (1) meant
equivalent monetary compensation, or else (2) initially meant literal
physical punishment but was reinterpreted as monetary equivalence at a
relatively early stage in legal history (in the early postbiblical
period at the latest).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:21

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²¹ And one who strikes an animal shall pay for it, and one who strikes a
human shall be put to death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:22

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²² You shall have one judgment: it will be the same for the alien and the
citizen; because I am YHWH, your God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Leviticus 24:23

------------------------------------------------------------------------

²³ And Moses spoke to the children of Israel. And they brought out the
one who cursed to the outside of the camp, and they battered him with
stone.

And the children of Israel had done as YHWH commanded Moses.
